[00:00:00] Not just how they felt about the training, but also the teacher, how the staff go away from changes. So we're looking really hard at how to get a better impact for this, which would be good for funders, providers and learners. That tool's rolling out now. Fourth, the review of the retirement villagers' actors proceed well. Legislative drafting has commenced with the bill intended to be introduced mid-year. This is the culmination of work we've led since 2020, working with Housing and Urban Development to rebalance consumer rights with operator rights. And fifth, KiwiSaver, recommendation to action. One of the highlights of the year was the government adoption of our recommendation to lift KiwiSaver default contributions from 3% to 4%, and to extend employer and government

[00:00:47] contributions to 16 and 17-year-olds. We calculated that KiwiSaver will now last 30% longer for median earners, which is a transformational outcome for many future retirees. Within two days of the announcement, there's a 2,500% increase in active users of the sorted KiwiSaver calculator, which tells you something about the appetite-trusted, independent information. So the breadth of impact of our work across government and the sector were the very small team. But the message I must want to leave with you finally is that a holistic long-term view of the retirement income system is essential.

[00:01:33] Tinkering with settings simply weakens the structure of the system. The latest is allowing access to KiwiSaver for farm ownership. A farm is a business. This is poor policy and weakens the fundamental purpose of KiwiSaver being a retirement scheme, not a general savings or business scheme. KiwiSaver is, of course, voluntary. Another tinker earlier allowed total remuneration, where the employee is actually paying both their contribution and the employers. This was not in the original KiwiSaver scheme, was permitted by a law changed by a national government in 2008. No subsequent government has repealed it. It means people have less take-home pay,

[00:02:19] and employers are not doing their bit. Short-term thinking with the retirement income system is a real threat to the well-being of future older New Zealanders. That's you. We delivered our substantial 2025 review of retirement income policies in December. Its main message is that system change will happen. And a cross-party approach is the best way to develop a principled 10-year plan to consider strategic change for both KiwiSaver and Super together. Both are essential mechanisms that work together. So I leave you with this thought. This committee, itself a cross-party mechanism,

[00:03:06] has an opportunity to support that key recommendation, to promote a measured cross-party approach to considering long-term system change. This committee could review the mechanism suggested by the Commission and our report and doubtless improve it. We know collaboration is possible. The system will fail New Zealanders if we can't find new ways to think long-term, as New Zealand grapples with increasingly complex issues. Ngorera, te ina koutou, te ina koutou, te ina koutou, kato. Thank you so much. First question from Dr Lawrence, you know. Thank you, Chair. And I just want to first say thank you so much for all of your work, Jane. And I particularly appreciate your briefing on aging population and the flassie and social services and communities as well.

[00:03:52] My first question, so it's focused on one part of that, which is retirement village. Now we know we have seen the cabinet paper when it comes to retirement village and you mentioned your report that you were involved in that. In terms of the actual cabinet paper that we've seen and what you've heard from retirement village residents, do you think that the recommendation and the perspective has been reflected in that cabinet paper? The proposed legislation moves a long way ahead from where we were in 2020. Some of the changes have already been implemented by the operators, which is amazing. Some of the changes are yet to be implemented are still good and there are still a few areas that will continue to be the subject of debate,

[00:04:38] which will be a very good and interesting select committee time. As part of the review, supplementary chair, what do you think would be the impact for retirees if retirement village doesn't look into capital sharing? That's probably the remaining number of the issues, right? And the real question then is when repayment might happen and how much repayment happens from the original capital sale, right? So those are really crunchy business debates and resident issues. And I think probably further the modelling needs to be done on this, but no matter what happens, the bill itself is a major advance

[00:05:24] on where we are at the moment, which is dealing with 20-year-old legislation. That's well out of date. Just to go to the chair, I have a new question on income. All right, so we'll come back to you later then. We have a supplementary problem in good leadership. Yeah, thank you for the work that you've done on this with HUD and noting that it appears that the capital repayments will be mandated to a year, which in my view and in my members' bill is not enough, minus three months. Lawrence Sunao and I did ask for an exposure draft of the bill and haven't received it. But I'm wondering, do you accept that exclusion of existing contracts will actually disadvantage those who are already in retirement villages, because they'll be the last cab off the rank

[00:06:11] to have the incentivisation for their licences to occupy to be sold by operators, particularly in an environment where we've got fast track building consent happening and expansion of villages. And if so, what actions would you like to see the government take around, rather than excluding retrospectivity, what further action could they take to fathom out a way that is fair to all retirement village residents so that we avoid a situation where those on current contracts will actually be disadvantaged by the new law? Yeah, again, I think this is the last crunchy hurdle to be jumped. You've got a longstanding legal principle that says contract, they just sort of changes aren't retrospective in most cases.

[00:06:58] You've got a good argument from the current residents going, yes, I know, but. And I think what will need to happen is some really good legal research on precedence. If there is a precedent for retrospectivity, what does it look like? Is it as strong as this one? I don't know. I don't know whether that work's been done by hand yet, but I can see that it's going to have to be to help resolve this issue. Just one more suffer, fine, yeah. And acknowledging that we had the Residential Tenancies Act, which could be considered an analogue, we've had changes made during COVID to commercial tenancies, which were retrospective in application and we've recently had statements in the House by Honourable Brock Van Velden that question the nature of particular provisions of contracts, saying that if they are just provisions,

[00:07:43] they may not be retrospective. So in all of that context, absolutely endorse what you've just said about further legal work. That's right. Again, every example that could be found for an equivalent approach would be helpful to that argument. Thank you. That's a commentary from Dr David Witsman. Yeah, a supplementary on this. Never talked about capital share, and we're talking about timing really, aren't we? Has there been any international comparative analysis of where our sector sits as proposed to others? More opposed? The international comparators are not that simple, actually. Our side is quite different from others, which is no great surprise to anything in New Zealand, really. I've forgotten what the Australian situation is. Do you remember? Six minutes. Yeah, I think it is, but it varies at state and federal.

[00:08:31] But again, it's a very different coverage of license to occupy this as quite different. Yeah. So my instinctive response is always to find the answers to bring that home. But we caught up, which is why we had to go. To identify what the problem was here. All right. New question from Dr Vanessa. Thank you, manager. And thank you very much for all the contribution that you've made over the time as commissioner. It's been wonderful to watch and see from this committee how it's progressing. Previously, you've had reports around retirement age and basically recommended that the retirement age not be adjusted or lifted. One of the things that we have to struggle with as a country

[00:09:18] is how we pay for our superannuation scheme going forward. If that's not the solution, what in your view could be a solution for the sustainability and ability of our superannuation scheme going forward? That's a really good question. And it is one of the core questions around the system itself, which is why we say tinkering or one-step solutions are not the way to deal with this, right? If we can get commitment to developing a long-term plan, then at that stage, all those competing tensions can be evaluated cross-portfolio, cross-party,

[00:10:03] and then where will we want to land as a country? It really needs to focus at a higher level on vision. What kind of country do we want for older New Zealanders and then work down from that? Affordability is absolutely a question. The answer is, are there other elements of government spending that could stop to help make it affordable, or is a good question? There are other mechanisms and system settings that could be looked at as well. For instance, means testing between 65 and 70, something like that. But none of these things should be considered an isolation without having a bit of an overall game plan. If we want to change things, then can we do it in a meaningful and holistic way that gets the best set of results for what is a series of quite complicated problems?

[00:10:51] Just a supplementary on that. What work have you done so far in that area, or is there any recommendation for further research or public engagement that you would make? The recommendation is to develop a plan. It's a very large document, and it's excellent bedtime reading. Yeah. All right, I support you, Trom. Yeah, thank you, Commissioner. I'm really concerned about a particular cohort of New Zealanders who don't fall into the traditional thing we've relied on around home ownership and KiwiSaver funds. And when I look at our current superannuation, it feels to me like an efficient universal basic income at an end of life where targeting would be inefficient.

[00:11:39] What is your concern for that cohort who are now couch surfing or even homeless if we were to continue with incremental change or just changing settings rather than comprehensive reform? It's, again, another good question. This is almost a forgotten cohort, which is why we keep saying we cannot do individual system change in isolation. So if you are of the view, for instance, that if you just put NZ Super age up, end of problem, job done, that's the narrowest of narrow views and does not take into account the impacts on a series of different types of people. Those impacts need to be analysed carefully. So those people that you're talking about now,

[00:12:24] we are predicting that this is going to rise considerably. We're predicting a 100% increase in renters by 2048 and NZ Super is designed for not incurring considerable housing costs. It's designed for being mortgage-free or being a well-subsidised council or state housing. Those models themselves are under enormous pressure, as you know. So my plea is that every time we get questions like this, we go, it's part of the great bucket of problems in this space and we can't ignore the big ones. That's one. All right, supplementary from Lawrence, you know. Thank you. And this also overtakes my primary question. Later. Yeah, we look more...

[00:13:09] No, no, no, I've seen... I don't have a primary anymore. This is the supplementary. So on that, two supplementary. First one is what modelling has been done on those who are over 65 were purely looking at pension plus maybe accommodation supplement who are still renting at a market rate, not in public housing. Do we have any modelling on what proportion of their super or pension is being used towards rent? That's one for my colleague in the policy and research team. It's not something we have directly modelled, but we do know that about 40% of people on New Zealand Super just rely on New Zealand Super and pretty much that and nothing else. And we see that that group of people, particularly who are renting, is being overrepresented at the poverty statistics

[00:13:56] of the over 65s. And I think what's striking is we actually have seen quite a remarkable increase in poverty in the over 65 groups. It used to be almost practically zero, but now it's actually slightly higher than the working age population. So we are seeing emerging concerns there. We haven't specifically measured the degree of which people are having to spend on New Zealand Super on rent, though. And second question is one of the things we heard recently from, for example, Housing First Ototahi is the fact that over 65-year-olds has had the most drastic increase, a 300% increase on the social housing register, and they're waiting for that. While you're saying there's a long-term, non-partisan solution we should all be looking at, what would be a recommendation for immediate solution? There's no immediate solutions for housing.

[00:14:44] That is what is also one of the things I've learned in this job. But one of the things I wanted to do during my tenure is to ensure that in the housing debate, which was all about the problems of first home buyers when I started, and it sure was a problem, that the housing debate needs to think more broadly and absolutely consider what older New Zealanders need because the stereotype of us all sitting in nice comfortable little class houses fully paid off is indeed that a stereotype. Okay, Hamish. Yes, thank you. Just following up on that, with your modelling, over the last couple of quarters, we've seen the highest level of first home buyers as a percentage of real estate sales, within 29%. Has that been taken in consideration

[00:15:31] when your modelling future demand for housing in 65-plus because it's something that has kind of flown under the radar? The first home buyers, you know, even flowed depending on market conditions, right? And so that when the interest rates dropped and the housing prices dropped, it became more attractive. But yes, they're considered with an overall picture, are they not? Yeah, quite different segments of the housing market. And one thing where we have done research was to interview quite a number of landlords just to try and understand what the private rental market looked like for over 65s and there was basically very low awareness of, you know, sort of the ageing of the population and the fact that the ability to provide

[00:16:17] good rental properties is going to require some sort of changes to sort of layouts of bathrooms and those sorts of questions. So we're not really, the private market's not really delivering a rental stock that's suitable for the over 65 population. So that's probably where we have the larger concern rather than worrying about sort of implications with the sort of first home buyers. First home buyers. All right, I'll go to Ruben Davidson. Do you have any family? I do. You've been asking for a while. Yeah. And I just wanted to acknowledge your role as commissioner and caution anyone who has the words retirement and Jane Ritzen in the same sentence. But my question is around KiwiSaver, I'm seeing anecdotally through my office, but also electric office, but also through conversations

[00:17:05] with JPs in the area, record numbers of people accessing KiwiSaver funds early. You spoke about the shifts in default and the potential for KiwiSaver to last 30% longer. My question is really around what data that's relying on and at what point in time based on the huge search we're seeing in people accessing KiwiSaver funds earlier. Yeah, the overall percentage of people that make hardship withdrawals is about 1.5% of the entire KiwiSaver population. It's absolutely true. It's rising at the moment because of the cost-e�iving crisis. No question. You've got two competing tensions here, right? If people really need the money and they're on the bread line,

[00:17:52] then it's best they take some. Just best at it they do. The question is whether they're getting sufficient advice at the grassroots, sufficient budget and mentoring assistance, whether their provider is establishing that their grounds are real and whether they can then get back on the KiwiSaver horse the moment their financial situation improves. So I don't have a problem with the ability to withdraw per se. What we don't know is the real reasons for withdrawal and that's a piece of work that my office will be doing over the next little while because there is lots and lots of anecdotal evidence. If it's all purely hardship, good. There's a little stream of thought that says people still think it's a savings account and they should be able to get their money whenever the time they feel like it.

[00:18:37] And that's the concern of that is true. And then there's lots of stories about weight loss surgery and all the rest of it. We just don't know any of this. And so the best thing my office can do, I think, is get the data because policy and evidence in this space. One thing. Do you sense of how long when that picture can be more accurate? Well, I know that Public Trust, for example, are doing a lot of good work in this space and so we're talking with them. So how long will it take? It is hard to provide a specific timeline, but it is actively being worked on right as we speak. Yeah, I had a direct conversation with Public Trust a couple of months ago because they're introducing, as it turns out,

[00:19:24] a whole new platform, which is going to be able to give them much more data than has ever been properly seen before. And they're one of the largest supervisors in the country. So they will be a really good litmus test, I think, of what they can see in terms of their provided customer stats. And from there, we can extrapolate it out. I'd like to think there'd be some data available next year. That is preliminary. Yeah. So, I supplementary. Thank you. Just going to the issue of how the market is going to accommodate a higher levels of disability. Wondering what analysis you've done on the best policy instruments. My intuition would suggest incentivising.

[00:20:12] But have you done a return on investment around what incentivising say-through tax breaks or other things would do to that market? And the second one is, I'll start with that one first. Thank you. The short answer is no. No. We're a very small commission, so we have to be really tightly focused, as I said at the beginning, so there are so many issues in this space to be thinking about. So we set out our priorities every year and our statement of performance expectations and really happy to see feedback over time about whether there's a particular area that you think is serious and within our scope and under-researched.

[00:20:57] We think we've got most of them. Could potentially be something that HUD could be looking at. Yeah. Secondly, just around that, gosh, do you have a view on with new social or public or community housing, given all of these issues, whether we should be adopting a particular higher standard of disabled access rather than the current standards? It would be logical, but we don't have a formal view. This is faikaha, a space, not really ours. Sure, yeah. Lawrence, you're done. Thank you. Quick supplementary, but may not be a quick response. Last year in the briefing, you identified in terms of KiwiSaver and it came as a surprise to the committee that women and self-employed are some of the most affected and not acknowledged when it comes to

[00:21:44] how substantial KiwiSaver is savings and women in particular are most at risk of shock events. You identified a problem last year, but what's the solution? The solution has been very aware of the gender disparities and policy. I mean, the root of this is the gender pay gap, which means that employers and legislators can have a view on this. The solution can lie with the individual and the individual's whānau. If we can consciousness raise enough so that women for a start understand it's an issue, which I didn't particularly, I have to say, when I started, and then can have conversations with their whānau about what might happen if they go on parental leave, what might happen if they're doing other caregiving, what might happen if they're out of the workforce

[00:22:31] for other kinds of reasons, and more specifically, the mean in their lives, the husbands and family, and so if they, and partners, if they can understand that this actually is real, then if they're good at meaning their lives, they will want to try and do something themselves too. Just also add in the review, this is something we did quite a lot of work on and on parental leave, we did make recommendations around, because currently, if you go on parental leave, the government does step in as your employer, but take up of that program is very low, it's about 20%, so we did make some recommendations around strengthening that, and we've done a lot of work with Henry, the company, and we're continuing to work with them on sort of trying to understand the self-employed

[00:23:17] and what can be done, but it's all in the review, so yeah. Marvellous. Looks like there are no more questions now, so thank you so much, Jen, for your service, best wishes, heaps of best wishes from the entire committee to you. Are there any final remarks that you would like to make? No, it's been a pleasure, as always, to come and talk with you about our work. My whole team is very passionate about what we do, because we are working for the greater good of New Zealanders, which is always very satisfying, but I would end by reiterating my comments that you are a classic cross-party mechanism. There are ways, I think, that committees can help drive a conversation that gets out of the silos and into what's better for long-term thinking. Thank you so much. Thank you.

[00:24:04] I appreciate you, thank you.
