[00:00:00] Behind now, are we? Yeah, we are, so. Hello. Transparency International, they're in by Zoom. Hello, how are you? Yeah, sorry about that, I just... No, let's go. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you. The committee, just for people beaming in for this, please leave some time for questions. Otherwise, I just have to cut you off, and that's not very helpful.

[00:00:46] The committee does like to ask questions. We've all read your submissions, so we don't have to keep going through and laboring them, because we've read them. Okay, the time issuers, thanks. Sure. I mean, I think taking that the submission is read. I just think there's three main issues, and that was one is the integrity of electoral processes generally. The second is oversight and accountability and reporting, especially on things like special votes. We don't think there's anybody who's got an eye on that, and I'm afraid it doesn't seem to be the second committee either. And the third one is education and information for new candidates, because then there's misinformation as well and disinformation, but those are the ones, the main ones. So what we think is, and I think other people have spoken on it,

[00:01:33] is that the kind of rigour that's enabled by the Electoral Commission running the central election is not then enabled in the local government elections, and that's putting stress on everywhere. We've recommended to move away from postal voting, because that's clearly not working, and I appreciate there's a lot of complexity in there. But also, we're really concerned about recent events in the last election. I realise that none have got to the police prosecution yet, but they were certainly significant enough to void an election result. And that was a serious concern, probably the largest. Whatever it was, somebody took those votes out of people's letterboxes, somebody faked the votes.

[00:02:20] And that's a hugely serious issue that needs to be dealt with more than just by the police. So I would have thought an inquiry would have been the best approach to that. Anyway, I think that's all I'm saying. We've got sort of what we've said, and so I'm happy to answer questions. All right. Thank you very much. I've got the first question from Mr Calvates. Thanks very much, Chair. Thanks very much for your submission. Found it really an interesting read. Was interested in your point made under 2B1 about conduct of elections and processes prior to election day for raising issues, and just interested if you had any thoughts about how that could occur? Yes, I would be trying to nut that through as well. How would you actually manage it? I suppose you could have the initiation of an inquiry

[00:03:07] at the point at which it's raised. It's possible that I don't think there was any ability for people to, for the Electoral Officer to have initial inquiries, to have an inquiry inquiry. It certainly is a problem, and it's not for me to work out because I think it needs a good legal brain to work out what's fair and due process around that. After all, you are in the middle of an election. It's possible. You don't want to attract people attacking others just for the sake of putting an election off. You don't want to smirch the name of any, but on the other hand, it was such a serious issue, and it could only be dealt with afterwards, and I think there has to be a mechanism. If there was an Electoral Commission role, that would be the place for it to be considered. So it would be lodged with the Electoral Commission

[00:03:52] during the election process. OK. OK. Ms Celia Boyle. Thank you. Thank you very much for your submission and your concerns about transparency and democracy. You've mentioned the report of the local government electoral working group, and you would generally believe that having local elections run by the Electoral Commission would be more transparent, and it would be more transparent. Would be more transparent than by two private companies that we can't use the Official Informations Act on.

[00:04:37] That's correct. There's a number of reasons why we think it would be better, and that education element also goes to that. We tried, and also transparency, and we tried very hard to find what the elements, what people were being told at different sites, seems to be quite variable. There does not seem to be any consideration in many of them, that they're not actually talking about what you cannot do and what's ethically not able to be done or legally not able to be done. You know, trying to appraise our voters, for example, should be something that's 101 really and a candidate's briefing. That's the problem with a lot of new candidates being new on every local body election.

[00:05:22] You've got the potential for many more people to really not understand what the electoral process isn't about, and I think that was seen in a couple of other examples. A couple of other examples there. Thank you. All right. Hey, I've got to thank you for your submission. It was a fascinating submission, particularly going through all that analysis. So, really appreciate you bringing that to attention. Good. I do think the problem with special votes is also it's still not available on the Government of Internal Affairs website. So, that kind of lack of transparency about what's happening with special votes in those local elections is a real problem. It means that you're not able to do your job properly either. So, I think that's a significant issue around the elections and that's partly because you've got private providers doing that work.

[00:06:09] Okay. Thank you. Right. Now, we've got the Green Party at ByZoom. Mr. Summable, are you with us? He's on folks. Just going through it. Okay. Mr. Summable, if you're there, that'd be great. Good morning, Mr. Summable. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you. Right. Thank you very much. I'm Alan Summable. I'm co-convener of the Greens Local Government Caucus.

[00:06:55] Local Government Caucus represents 28 elected members around the country who were endorsed by the Green Party in the 2025 elections. I'm a regional councillor with the Otago Regional Council and I'm here in in Autoporty, Dunedin. I'll concentrate on a few parts of our written submission, the parts where I have the closest personal knowledge and experience. I guess our starting point is the belief that it should be straightforward for people to vote and that goes back into the principles. I can refer to the principles of the local electoral act in 2001 where it says all qualified persons have a reasonable and equal opportunity

[00:07:40] to cast an informed vote and it talks about public confidence and public understanding of local electoral processes. So I think my first point is that the postal voting system is well past its use by date and it effectively excludes many people from casting a vote. I'll relate some of my experience from Dunedin last year. In July last year we did a Green Party members did a round of door knocking in different parts of Dunedin with the intent of asking people are you enrolled and getting them enrolled to vote. One area we concentrated on was North Dunedin an area with a high transient population with many student

[00:08:26] tertiary students there. What we found was mail composting in letterboxes down the street including pile of orange electoral commission envelopes and naturally of course we directed people to the voting Z website to get them enrolled. We returned to the area in September and found in North Dunedin the majority of people had not received their voting papers that was either because they had moved flats from last year and not updated their address in spite of our best efforts or they were enrolled at their parents address in another town and so did not receive their voting papers. So the postal voting system it's certainly not the whole explanation for the low voter turnout

[00:09:12] but I think it is part of it. As a solution I'd go with the old GNZ proposals I think you've heard from them this morning and they've gone into that in great detail so please let's retire the postal voting system and have something better in place before 2028. Another important point for us is to say let's use STV for all elections in all councils be consistent and use the more democratic STV approach. Again using Otago for an example the Otago Regional Council and the Dunedin City Council use STV the other councils in the region use first past the post so it ended up

[00:09:58] with the situation that voters in Queenstown Lakes District Council Central Otago and Clutha had two voting systems to contend with in the same set of voting papers I see this evidence presented to you in their submission by the Greater Wellington Regional Council saying this is robust data across numerous Australian elections clear evidence of a higher level of informal votes where electives are asked to apply different voting systems in multi-member elections so let's not put those additional barriers for people let's use the one system and also propose to increase government resourcing to aid the participation of people with disabilities. One specific

[00:10:44] suggestion from us is to apply the Electoral Access Fund also to local body elections so going back to the local Electoral Act 2001 all qualified persons have a reasonable and equal opportunity to accept nomination as a candidate and that use of the Electoral Access Fund would assist with that you'll have seen that a part of our submission was on handling of role data there are some specific recommendations that's not my area of expertise but that's still useful stuff I'll be pleased to take any questions now Right well rather unsurprisingly we've got Celia Wade-Brown who wants to ask you a question Cura Alan

[00:11:30] thank you for presenting this I'm interested in the area of consistency between local and central government election processes and the postal versus in person and the commission running the education makes sense presumably you would want to see some alignment in the enrollment rule so at the moment as I understand it the local government you can enroll up to the day before until recently central government you could enroll on the day and now that's been rolled back should we settle on something that is common to both systems I think that consistency is very

[00:12:16] helpful and in that example that you have given our very very strong preference would be to be able to enroll right up until election day but yeah there are a number of places where that consistency can be brought in and one way of achieving that would be to have the electoral commission managing local body local council elections as well thank you can I ask you a question you said in respect to overseas voters they should get their voting papers earlier how many people actually vote living in London or New York or Singapore in a local election in the old New Zealand we have difficult again for a national election do you know what the numbers are

[00:13:02] look I'm afraid I do not know the answer to that I know specific question I don't have any other questions thank you for your time this morning it's a good submission thanks for the opportunity to present right now we're going to Joe Daly from the Christchurch City Council by Zoom are you there I presume it's oh good morning just yeah we're still going now we've got 10 minutes with you we have read your submission but the time is yours you know you know you know you know

[00:13:48] I'm Joe Daly I'm the Council's Governance Advisor and I'm also our Deputy Electoral Officer I do have an apology from our elected members who are currently sitting through annual plan hearings day two of you've obviously got the council's submission and I'll just reiterate a few key points from that including those related to your terms of reference and I'll also just introduce a couple of points from some work council's staff have done post-election in analyzing the voter turnout and from survey responses to some election-related questions council's consistently submitted in support of changes to legislation to allow for the modernization of voting

[00:14:34] increasing civic education and awareness nationally accessibility including to those overseas and improving central government support and funding for local elections like probably everyone you're hearing from we are concerned at the decline of voter participation and the ability to attract good candidates and these matters are in line with the national trends the Justice Committee in the time I've been working closely with elections has made many recommendations relating to these matters which disappointingly haven't been progressed. In particular the consistent theme from those recommendations is regarding modernization and alternative voting methods, review of postal

[00:15:20] challenges including alternatives for overseas and the review of voting systems and methods so we're really keen to see some of those recommendations and recommendations you yourselves may make actually progressed rather than staying in a report just regarding the voting process the key a question you asked regarding disallowed special voters we had 82% of those that returned special voting documents allowed and the majority of those disallowed were because they weren't able to be verified on the electoral role so that could have rolled into the next point regarding the electoral roles we didn't have any significant issues with them

[00:16:06] the majority of electors who enrolled or were on the unpublished role who enrolled past the close of the final role didn't receive clear or full information on what they needed to do to be able to vote so we see that that is really an opportunity for change particularly those unpublished role electors we've got over 3000 votes and only 26% of them received requested special voting documents because they received correspondence from the Electoral Commission but there's not much detail in there apart from contact the council if you want to make a vote

[00:16:52] there's an opportunity to put more information in there be strongly supportive of that just regarding the vote bins we had special voting in all our council facilities including our recreation centres we also had them at the airport at the university library and in supermarkets so they worked really well and neighbouring councils used similar and we were promoting that voting documents could be returned across those boundaries because we all used the same election service provider and we also had special voting and onsite voting available from 12 sites across the city so that was Monday to Friday and we also had

[00:17:38] sites open specifically for that on the weekend prior to election day and election day so there's quite a lot of effort made in making it as accessible as possible we didn't have any significant issues raised regarding integrity in Christchurch or not that I or our electoral officer were aware of but reports from candidates about online activity from other candidates in the public which I'm sure you're well aware of those kind of concerns we did receive a number of queries regarding the requirements entitlements or qualifications necessary for a person to stand as an elected member which was something very we have an external Electoral Officer now

[00:18:24] and that has worked well with our staff and with regard to the Electoral Commission as you'll see from the submission strongly support an increased role in them with good consultation on how that works myself and our communications team work really closely with our local Electoral Commission engagement team we attend events together we make sure there's always voting information in our sites and things like that and we have a partnership and a really good example of what perhaps could happen nationally and just a couple of comments on our participation that you would have seen we had reduced participation down to 38% we've got 16 geographical

[00:19:10] wards across the city and the turnout varied from 53% in banks a smaller community to 27% in Rickerton we source some information from the Electoral Commission to match with data provided by our service provider on those that voted the results weren't surprising only one in four electors from 18 to 24 voted over half the electors from 65 to 79 voted demographics covered 25% of electors with Maori descent voted compared with 39% without and many of the wards with that lower turnout were also wards with higher

[00:19:56] instances of socioeconomic deprivation and we had our life in Christchurch survey which is an annual survey we do, it went out to 40,000 people and we had nearly four and a half thousand surveys returned and these are people that have engaged with council or put themselves on this panel and the key statistics from that report on responses which we're still finalising is 90% of those people who responded indicated they voted 89% of those respondents indicated they found it very easy or easy to vote and the biggest identified reason for not voting was they didn't get around to it they couldn't find enough information about the candidates

[00:20:42] or they couldn't find a candidate that appealed final comments on May that they told us were what would make it easier to vote over half the respondents indicated being able to vote online as you'd imagine we had a lot of comments about postal being out of date unhelpful, not user friendly we have 42% of those respondents wanted more information about candidates and what they stand for and 28% of those candidates of those respondents indicated they were more active in the community during the election thank you for the opportunity questions at this time we've got one from Mr Dan Rosevon

[00:21:28] you mentioned here about voting documents being delivered by New Zealand Post I was wondering with New Zealand Post warning back a lot of the services across Church and Canterbury how that might affect the next election if we go continue with the status quo with our voting system we used a mixture of New Zealand Post and DX not aware of any significant issues with that delivery but obviously a reduction in services raises concerns about the viability of Post and just referring to the comments from the previous submitter regarding use of letterboxes these days and how many people

[00:22:14] actually do get posted mail can I can I just ask you obviously seem to run a pretty good operation what are your institutional arrangements some councils use third parties do you as yours basically in-house the promotion is that what I understood from or implied from your comments before we've got an external electoral officer and an external election service provider but promotion and sort of the general operations excluding the processing of votes and distribution of votes is done by council special by allocation all right thank you I've got Celia White Brown

[00:23:00] thank you Joe I do have a question about how presumably you support the Government New Zealand electoral working group thing that wants electoral commission to take on a bigger role how do you see that best if we were to go down that route at some stage how do we combine that national reach with a more local focus on who the candidates are where the meetings are that side of getting people to really think local about who they're voting for I'm just acknowledging I'm presenting a council submission so I may have some more detail views but in short in our submission we've referenced

[00:23:46] you know the need for consultation on how that's going to work and you know potentially that overarching national messaging and things like that with local promotion being led by the councils whether or not I would see that should be the partnership with the commission but sort of aspects I think would need council leadership Thank you Thank you very much for your contribution this morning and joining us from Christchurch Thank you for the opportunity Right now we've got Councillor Richard Hill from Auckland Council by Zoom I think we've seen him on there Mr. Hill's are you there Good morning we've read your submission

[00:24:32] so leave a little bit of questions please Thank you very much I'll sort of read a lot of what I'm going to say just to make sure I get it right but yes you've read our submission but largely obviously the 29% turnout for Auckland in my opinion disaster for democracy but it is very concerning for us We do believe there are range of factors that have led to that decline of participation but we do consider that postal voting is part of that I think it was around 38% of the people who said they didn't vote saying the reason was they filled it out

[00:25:18] they didn't take it back they forgot to and that's quite a big section of the community who just didn't pop it back so we think that postal voting and the issues there it also extended the timeframe this year because of the postal service situation we had to have an additional week or so because of the time the leaders go out and the leaders can come back in we consider that greater national leadership and coordination of the administration of local elections is required in particular the council reiterates its support for the electoral commission to take responsibility for delivering local elections given its experience administering parliamentary elections and the operational capability and independence required to manage the elections at scale Council would welcome strengthening the

[00:26:04] integrity framework surrounding elections current processes rely heavily on the unsuccessful candidates initiating court proceedings to challenge election results and council recommends that you could introduce automatic recounts where margins are small such we had some margins that never got to a recount as low as seven votes in that we acknowledge that voting method reform alone will not reverse declining participation a broader nationally coordinated approach is required to improve public understanding of local government encourage participation in local elections include strengthening civic education increasing visibility of local elections to a level comparable to parliamentary elections and consider structural reforms to enable greater greater alignment between

[00:26:50] local and central functions we obviously recommend the aim is to modernise their local electoral system strengthen electoral integrity and support for a new public participation and we do think we need to transition away from postal even if the government removed postal as an option it just has become fairly untenable when as a candidate delivering pamphlets to many letter boxes seeing just piles of them sitting in the mud wet and we have had issues up here as you know with the whole election being quashed due to some concerns around the integrity of those ballots and whether people were collecting ballots to vote for others

[00:27:36] the advance voting issues when we had 188 I think boxes around the the whole city we had good access to drop votes off if people had them and we did spend a lot of money on advertising you know as a council it's the private organisation that does the vote inside of things we recommend that voters who are overseas during the election period are enabled to access and return their voting documents like the parliamentary elections so parliamentary elections are really easy if you're overseas you can basically take a picture of your vote and send it in that is not what is enabled under for local government special votes we want that to be reviewed to simplify the information required about

[00:28:22] I don't think it was half about 40% of our special votes you know several thousand were disallowed and some of that was to do with occupation being incorrect or occupation not being written that is not a requirement in parliamentary special votes required in local government so someone was a student or someone changed their job or someone just didn't want to fill out the butcher or baker or candlestick maker that was actually their vote was disallowed and when you had areas there was a change someone not getting elected by seven or eight votes that could have been the difference we want to continue the provision of telephone dictation voting more support for voters with disabilities

[00:29:08] or talked about recounts and safeguards sorry we've got a few questions we also the last one was just we support extending local government to four years if the government does potentially having them at the same time the other one was investigating compulsory voting in Brisbane I think they had a turn out for local elections of 85% and compulsory voting whereas in Western Australia they don't and they're down about the same as us 30% so just investigating that for local government right first question is from Rheema Markle in your introduction right now

[00:29:54] you've been talking about we we found this who is we the Auckland council sorry which other councillors were you in liaison with respect to this report this submission has been approved by all councillors and had local board input as well this is not my this is not my personal submission sorry did you actually talk to them and see what can you add to this report to this submission everyone we had workshops we had abilities to put information in and then it was debated at full council okay awesome thank you can I ask another question with respect to you said the integrity of ballot papers

[00:30:40] what are you referring to councillor so there was lots of anecdotal information of people seeing including myself ballots streamed across neighbourhoods sitting wet in areas Morris Williamson talked about them being in letter boxes of houses that were removed for the eastern busway that didn't exist at all and then we have had a whole election poshed through a process that the courts decided that there were so many votes of people that were voted for but those people said they didn't vote so there were a lot of ballots that were which one was that just to be absolutely just to be absolutely it's the Autara Papatoi Toys election so at the moment

[00:31:26] the elections going on at the moment so yeah there clearly is an issue there but also this everyone has a story about seeing just tons of votes sitting and people going yeah I know we've got the point right I've got a question from Camelia Village thank you thanks Richard for your submission I think the point that you raised around the issue with special votes is something that the committee should note and I hope that we're able to address that in our report the question I had for you though is you may or may not have had the opportunity to see the report of local government New Zealand which is obviously separate from Council now I just wanted to know if you agreed with or Auckland Council agreed with their recommendations and specifically

[00:32:12] there seemed to be quite a bit of alignment with what you were suggesting with the Electoral Commission we also asked them about how that would be paid for and they indicated that it would maybe a proposed suggestion the central government and local government paying some of the costs of there being a living structure has Auckland Council thought into how the Electoral Commission change if that was implemented might be funded yeah I mean I guess there are already costs that would be shared anyway there's already Electoral Commission already doing this work so if we were able to tap into that the same people the same trained people to be able to spread that and maybe that would be good training for the central government election as well not training because both should be important but at the moment

[00:32:58] we do our own structures pay our own way have it private organisations do the voting if throughout the process that that was shared it would probably be cheaper I imagine over time for everyone but also it's standardised for everyone they've got one port of call for both elections thank you right Celia, where are you Brown thank you good morning Richard I had a question on the special votes not the disallowed ones I think that's been covered well but that very big increase in the number of special votes and I wondered two things about it first of all do you think that the new ability for enrolment details to be automatically updated like if somebody changes their address through

[00:33:44] Wakakotahi would help secondly do you know if people tried to enrol or update their enrolment details on the morning because local government that's not it you have to have been rolled by the day before do you have any information on there was there were people saying that they couldn't enrol on the day but you couldn't roll right up to the day which is helpful but it's just disappointing that significant number would disallowed due to things like information being wrong automatic updates would be amazing a lot of people shown by the sensors shown by the voting and special votes moving around within a three-year period lots of people especially in Auckland you know renters etc a lot of moving around

[00:34:30] the floods was you know just placed hundreds and hundreds of families and so that you know the more we can make it easier for people because they're not thinking about it every day oh I need to update my enrolment until they get there and go why can't I get my voting papers or why did someone vote for me when I didn't vote right thank you Mr Hills for a comprehensive submission this morning and coming from Auckland right I think we've got Kay Jones who's joining us becoming a regular which is nice right we've got Prime Ministers with you Kia ora, can I see lovely to see you all and there's some new faces I haven't met before I would just endorse many of the comments made by local government New Zealand

[00:35:16] Richard Hills I've been watching online the previous ones and also even more strongly than my written submission support the move away from postal voting and to bring back a consistent in-person vote like we have for national for central parliamentary elections I don't want to sort of talk too long because you know you may have questions but an example would be of community education so a friend who's a Muslim woman in an area not Wellington organised with her community education about what voting rights are here because this is something that some of the members

[00:36:02] of the group did not have in their countries of origin they are now New Zealand permanent residents and citizens and voting is new so educating them about parliamentary elections and that system was a challenge but they got through it they understood it when it came to then say by the way we also have local government elections which use a different process it was a really difficult education issue and unless they actually by that stage knew that they were not engaged with the process of posting for some of them they didn't have security of housing

[00:36:48] so the mail was difficult there were a lot of things so that's just one group but I'm also a community moderator and in the online group of over 2,000 people that I moderate every week there is somebody concerned about a parcel missing or a parcel being misdelivered to them and that's parcels so we know about them but people don't know what mail they don't get except when there are reports of oh if you're in that block of flats all your ballot papers have been strewn down the street and yes we had those reports and yes we can tell people they can get a special vote if they know in advance but for many of them the details they get does not make it easy and so they just don't vote so there's a whole bunch of people who don't get

[00:37:34] their right to vote because of procedural issues as opposed to the much easier process which is still not perfect but easier for being able to go to a voting booth and cast your ballot so I'll leave it to a question. Thank you very much. Right, questions members? Okay, not good. Yes there's no question I mean no one else thank you very much. I think the burning question we've heard so much about postal votes and things like that contributing to low voter turnout but it's very low it's very low in Auckland and you know we just heard one of the councillors go on about so many other things

[00:38:20] but I look at people like him I'm like why is it so low in Brooklyn and since we've got a bit of time well I've lived in Auckland and because as you've gathered I'm a chatty person who goes and talks with neighbours and other people and gets engaged in communities but that's not the case for everyone there are many communities within Auckland who tend to operate within themselves and unless they have a point of engagement of somebody coming to them or being part of their community they don't see the relevance to them there isn't sort of a big publicity campaign to raise the awareness of what local government does and how it connects to them and why their votes

[00:39:06] make a difference. We get far more information and I'll definitely echo those calls for having the electoral commission taking a stronger role so that there can be more work together with community groups about raising the awareness of what the importance of their vote means and why they should have an opportunity and of course making sure it's simplified and modern so like a special voting paper that had this occupation for somebody who's like am I a contractor or am I a whatever you know all the barriers need to be removed to make it as simple as as possible and it needs to be done in advance not just in the last two weeks before an election because it takes people a while to get the head around ideas and even things

[00:39:52] like yes Auckland council Wellington council many councils have their meetings online but people don't necessarily go to them and know about them and you're going to be hearing after me from Sam Summers and people on the it's in the ballot and they do a great job of trying to make it lively and engaging for what the voting is but they're not able to do that thing beforehand to say oh this is really important. You get really good turnouts at local government events if there is a particular issue of importance whether it's a polluted river or whether it's dog attacks in an area but that's you know a singles incident type of thing and people don't always remember that when it comes round to the how can they actually

[00:40:38] make sure that people who've got good ideas get on the council and can engage with them you know. Alright hey thank you Kay for coming again for your submission. Thank you. I'm going to ask Sam and Nick I'll see you at the back. Are you okay? Coming up I know we're a hit of time the next one's schedule is not available so thanks for being a man of all and this is the relevant we're also live streaming the select committee meeting for our followers to also be a watch because a lot of people don't know about our you can watch these online. Okay so we've got five minutes with you. Ten. Yes. We tried to get more but the committee said no. No that's enough. Yeah so it's in the ballot covered the

[00:41:24] 2025 local body elections I actually think we may have covered the better turnout councils on numbers because many of the councils were to cover broke the 50% mark as you would see in the submission we covered most of the great Wellington regional councils the lower half of the horizons a good chunk of community and also a limited part of Waikato the plan was to do more money talks and when there's a lack of it it does make a very difficult to actually make it function one thing I've noticed is when it comes to local councils is no one wants to fund coverage of the elections as a rule we did have some support from Manawatu district council Haurwhanau district council, and Cutterdale district council through

[00:42:10] venue higher charges not billed in the case of Bay of New regional council they approached us for $500 grants per meet the candidates event that involves their candidates and councils that who charged us were Taurua district council Palmerston or city council Southwire rapid district council Wellington city council Hutt city council, Whakatane district council and Western Bay of New district council and we also did try to apply for funding through grants through some councils with a lot of ghosting rejections going from there we you know, and candidate participation rate can be a bit all over the place some areas it's like you're the best thing that's come into town

[00:42:56] like Salwan Too Good with the TV show back in the day and then others of them sit there and run away like the plague and I'd like to say sorry to Celia's former council of Wellington city council but so many of them like to run away like the plague but that's the choice there. I did mainly the production parts of doing that in the Brazilian shows however, Nick is the one who dealt with all the candidates so would you like to take over? Yeah, yeah Hi, good morning everyone so one of my main roles was candidate liaison and I was very lucky to do that now in general it was really, really really good communication between the two candidates and it's in the ballot

[00:43:42] and you know, there are a lot of times where things could have been made a lot easier with help from the council Sam or If I could tell you district council was one that wouldn't some candidates would not tick the box or at least see details so would try for the Electoral Officer was not doing it with a team foot barge post other councils like just forwarded it on yeah, so sometimes a battle and this is something that we do out of civic duty just we believe it should be done

[00:44:28] and we have we would like it to be easier and more that involved well, it would communication you're really essentially at the hands of the council for this one, yes, for local bodies we are yeah, okay right, hey, have we finished now, sorry, I have right, let's have some questions members no doubt I've thought one thank you I was speaking to Todd but to be honest, I'm subbing and I'm not completely all over the full conversation I'm really curious to how long you guys have been around or how long you've been doing

[00:45:14] started at the 2020 general election that went for a very interesting process in 2022 was when we upgraded and I spent three and a half grand on a broadcast computer basically put into TV quality broadcasting to put on Facebook, YouTube and Twitch and we've expanded to TikTok since then and so 2022 local bodies, the Hamilton West by-election and then proceeded on to the lower part of North Island for the 2023 general election, the Paul Boyack by-election and we covered a couple of by-elections, the Tauranga City Council special local bodies and the last local body elections I would love to be there but I mean James Meagher's also

[00:46:00] have expressed interest as well for getting there, we would love to this year I'd love to go to places like Westport and places in the middle of nowhere but yeah it's not an easy step when we've got a nice lovely body of water in the way but that is I'd love to make it happen I'll just take you to it Billok. Thank you very much I just wanted to make more of a comment, thank you for your interest in covering our democracy and I'm sure that you've probably watched more of our speeches than some of us at our table and I'm very welcome I'll put it this way, I can probably name off the names as good as the Speaker can but I don't think many people can. I think he probably takes some lessons from you in that regard.

[00:46:46] Thank you, thank you so much. That's fine. I think we might bring this to a close. Thank you very much. Thank you for your contribution. Nice to see you again. Now we're going to go back to Charlotte. Mel Sir, is that right? He's on the line, isn't she? Hello, are you there? Good point. It's okay, I think, can we be in a minute? Miss Mel Sir, are you available? Good morning. Nice to see you, sorry we jumped ahead. No, that's okay. Thank you so much for taking... We've got five minutes. We'd like to ask questions but

[00:47:32] we bought redraw submission but maybe highlight them just to keep it. Yeah, well I'm actually going to go through a little bit more. So I hope there might be time for questions, there might not be. So Tena koutou koutou. I'm Charlotte, I'm a district councillor in Wanganui. So I am going to be speaking from my direct experience of the 2025 elections in our district and also in support of my council's formal submission. So central to my point today is our local election system is no longer aligned with the realities of how people live, move and engage with democracy. The 2025 elections exposed major weaknesses in both how voting papers reached the level of the people and how democratic information reaches them. The first is the growing

[00:48:18] fragility of the postal voting. For many years, postal voting has been practical and trusted but the conditions that made it effective are changing. People are moving more frequently between rentals, temporary housing, family homes and care settings. And housing instability and transience are now a new form of voting. At the same time, the postal system itself is becoming less central to everyday life. Many people, particularly younger voters simply did not interact with their letterboxes in the same way previous generations did. During the campaign period, I personally walked past many letterboxes containing damaged and uncollected voting papers. The image has stayed with me because it symbolizes a voting system

[00:49:04] that is now a normal reality for many New Zealanders. It symbolizes a voting system that is becoming increasingly disconnected from the realities of modern life. And the impact of this was visible and the growing reliance on special votes. In Wanganui, around 18% of special votes were disallowed. Approximately 500 people who believed they had successfully voted but whose votes were never counted. And I want to be very clear that 500 people thinking they participated in local democracy only to have their vote excluded is not a low number. It's a warning sign. When some districts across the country reported disallowance rates as high as 60%, this points clearly to a structural national issue,

[00:49:50] not an isolated local error. The second issue I want to emphasize is the omission of Maori ward candidate information that was seen in multiple districts including my own. Issue is not simply the absence of profiles for individual candidates. The deeper harm is that many candidate statements do more than just describe the person standing. They help voters understand the broader purpose and democratic value of dedicated Maori representation. So when those profiles were admitted, voters received less civic information about the value of Maori representation itself. That is particularly serious where voters were simultaneously being asked to vote in referenda on where the Maori wards

[00:50:36] should continue. So in effect some voters were asked to decide the future of Maori representation while being given less information about that representation than they received for general ward positions. That creates an inequitable information environment and it risks shaping referendum outcomes themselves. In Wanganui the omission also exposed an accountability gap because the election was being delivered through a private contractual agreement. There was no sufficiently clear obligation on the provider to own and rapidly correct the error. But something as fundamental as democratic participation accountability should never depend on the fine print of a contract.

[00:51:22] For me these issues point to the same conclusion. Incremental delivery fixes are no longer enough. Orange bins, DXMail and other mitigations may improve convenience but they do not address the deeper structural weaknesses now visible in local election delivery. We need nationally consistent standards for voter communication special votes, candidate information and election administration. So I support transferring operational responsibility for local elections to the Electoral Commission while preserving a strong local role for councils in voter education community outreach and democratic leadership. The systems should be nationally robust. The relationships must remain local. So in closing, local democracy

[00:52:08] depends on public trust. If people cannot reliably receive their voting papers if hundreds of special votes are discarded and if voters do not receive equitable information about the purpose of representation itself then confidence and the legitimacy of the result is weakened. This no longer is a matter of process refinement. It is now a question of democratic resilience. Thank you. Thanks councillor. I've got a question from Mr Carl Bates. Thanks councillor. Charlotte good to see you this morning and appreciate the breadth of your submission and the issues you raised. Just a detailed question on the mail issue

[00:52:54] and highlighted the DX mail. Any particular challenge with DX mail versus New Zealand Post and the success of that and I appreciate that's an incremental change issue but just interested in any feedback on that because we've received in the constituency office feedback on DX mail and other areas of public service engagement. In terms of DX mail being superior or not as superior not as successful as New Zealand delivery. Any comments on that? Minister? I think we're at time. Hey thank you for your submission councillor doing that under your personal but very comprehensive submission

[00:53:40] and thank you for that. Thanks and all the best. We're going to go to Jess. All right we can just good morning Dale are you there with us? Good morning there you are. Nice to see you both. Hey now we've got 10 minutes with you Will ahead of schedule so thank you for coming on a bit earlier but looking forward to hearing what you have to say. Can you hear me okay? Yes we can. So we'll take our submission as read rather than going through

[00:54:26] line by line and perhaps we can just go straight to our summary because obviously we'd like more time for you guys to ask us questions so our summary is on our submission on page 7 and the first conclusion or recommendation really is the legislative review we would really encourage if we can a comprehensive review of our legislation local electoral act is 25 years old now it was written even before the internet so it does need we believe a full review and a full rewrite particularly if and it's a big if we are able to move into some form of electronic voting or something like that then the whole

[00:55:12] act I believe needs a full review. The second point special vote reform one of the points that you have asked us to comment on is the number of disallowed special votes and compared to allowed special votes we believe that whole process needs a review a rewrite special votes play a critical role we are under quite strict current legislative requirements I follow those strict legislative requirements because I must as an electoral officer and that does mean invalidating a number of special votes which is really difficult because I'm invalidating them on a technicality and someone's gone to a lot of trouble

[00:55:58] to exercise a special vote and I as the electoral office come along and disallowed because they haven't signed it they haven't dated it they haven't had it. I think that's the most technicality we've heard about occupation but what specifically Well a special vote has to accompany a a declaration must accompany a special vote so it must be signed and dated and witnessed and the occupation of course one of the biggest issues we had this time around was occupation we know that the electoral commission have now removed the electoral commission from their declarations we would like to follow suit and have that removed because it just makes sense

[00:56:44] the rationale is that not everyone has an occupation what do you do there so if we just want to have parity with the electoral commission and have some of that complexity removed and a review of that special vote process so we remove some of the barriers okay cool um so that's the story page sorry to interrupt you but no problem I think postal voting you will be aware of the limitations of New Zealand Post we also are aware of the two mail service providers which you heard earlier on New Zealand Post and DX Mail

[00:57:30] this was the first time that we pretty much split the country in two so New Zealand Post did about half and DX Mail did about half and in my view it worked very well we had the longer voting period we had two mail providers and they split the country and as I said in my view I think it worked very well it was also complimented by a significant increase in vote boxes in the community where people could then hand deliver it in their places where they go supermarkets and that sort of stuff libraries where they actually visit we do you are aware that Auckland Council is considering going to booth voting

[00:58:16] we are doing a lot of work on that on the Electrolobz for Auckland Council doing a lot of work on that we are talking with them I don't think it's a silver bullet there are a number of things that concern me a little bit with moving back to booth voting the cost increase is going to be significant I don't think the voter turnout is going to increase at all I think in fact it may decrease and I think the resources needed for booth voting is quite significant and because of that there is probably a bit of risk in there for local government but it is permitted under the legislation and it is a political decision systems and quality assurance that is with the

[00:59:02] issue we had with the Porta Key District Council where and I put my hand up totally for that one I did the final checker of everything that goes out of my office and I check absolutely everything and I missed it so it was as simple as that we had it on the voting document it was not in the candidate profile statement I didn't see that the checking process before we didn't see that however we have learnt from that and our software is being amended now so that there is an automatic cross checker if it is on the voting document it is in the booklet so that is being addressed now Civic Education that really really is important I think we have been pushing

[00:59:48] for civics now probably for 20 years I have been running elections for over 40 years we are pushing civics as a national comprehensive program for a number of years and I think it is really important just to educate electors what does the local government do why is it so important to exercise their vote etc in complaint management there is processes in our legislation now that people can complain and do to me there are processes in place where they can go directly to the police and then alleged offence we can submit things to the police directly so I think that is covered now I think that really covers our six conclusions

[01:00:34] and recommendations I am more than happy to take any questions we have a number of questions first one Mr Carl Bates thanks very much chair and thanks for the work you do I am interested in the special vote point and understand the occupation point I have quite a bit of feedback around the challenges with special votes through the election do you have any insight into the percentage of the votes that were done with council officers or with the council support programs across the country versus special votes done by other people in terms of what was accepted and what wasn't we probably do things slightly different in our competitors we ourselves process all special votes

[01:01:20] the councils themselves do not so all special votes come to me to my office and my staff process those we do not put them out to the council staff to do so I suppose what I am meaning is in my case for example I did my special vote in the council office with a council staff member do you have any insight into all of the votes say for example completed by those council officers that came through to you the percentage of those that actually were valid versus that weren't compared to special votes that were done through other means does that make sense yes no matter where they are

[01:02:06] received or who receives them they all still come back to our staff so we have a consistent approach of marking those or of checking those yes I think the question is more aligned to the percentage of special votes are filled in at a council office provided in front of a council person staff member how many of those percentage of those that may have been disallowed versus allow I don't have that we do issue a lot of special votes so we have an 0800 number so someone can ring up and we will send it out so we have no control over that so we'll send them out there is instructions on it but we're not sort of standing over them saying

[01:02:52] don't forget to fill that out if someone is coming into the office a council office or library we have that ability but not those with remote where it's through the post yes if I may someone may request a special vote through a council office but then they might just take it home fill it out at home and then put it back into the postal system we know it's been issued by a council office but we don't know the circumstances as how that was filled in thank you I understand Kamala thank you I just had a question around the special votes and the fact that occupation means that a blank occupation

[01:03:37] box means you can't count them where exactly is that specified regulation it's in the it's in the regulations thank you I've got a question from Dan Rose Mwan thank you an interesting point you had in your summary around factors that contribute to a trend in voter decline and it was non-resident rate-payer complexities and I was just wondering how that was leading to a decline in voter turnout our number of non-resident rate-payer electors each triangle election is steadily declining there is quite a complex

[01:04:23] enrollment process that a person must do so you live outside the district you pay rates within the district you are eligible to vote but there is quite a complex process to go through a stringent enrollment form which is regulations and that's a bit of a barrier we think for that process do you think it's worth scrapping that at all? a personal view or an official view a personal view is extremely expensive and we get very few on that role okay is that official or is that personal that's that's personal I better be careful that's personal you've only been doing it for 40 years

[01:05:09] or 4 decades whatever last question from Celia Wade Brown thank you chair and thank you for bringing up something other people haven't which is when a candidate is unopposed and I know that during the campaign this has explained to me that if the candidate is unopposed then they don't necessarily have to go in the candidate booklet you've said that you've got some software now that says if they are on the voting document then you better have something in the candidate booklet does that now mean that practically you will have something I mean I suppose the mayor runs unopposed you'll have something about the mayor because my view is that if you're looking at

[01:05:55] the makeover of a councillor as a whole you want to know who's there unopposed as well as the ones where there's a contest no that's not what that meant that meant that we cannot have a repeat of the apotheca situation where we had candidates on the voting document missing from the booklet that is now to be addressed what you're referring to is sorry I can't hear sorry just say that again I think what you're referring to well what I was referring to is the apotheca situation where we had them on the voting document but they did not appear in the booklet no no I'm not talking about that I'm talking about the example where you had people were running unopposed

[01:06:41] and therefore you complied with the legal requirements and did not put them in the candidate booklet is there anything that stops you being able to put them in the candidate booklet? I think we raised the issue of potential confusion of electors that they're saying why can't I vote for this person because they're in the booklet so that's one thing the second thing is if it was to be adopted it would have to be a national thing would have to everyone in the country should do the same so then your statement that your software checks against who's in the list so you're saying if it's unopposed you can't do a vote of no confidence

[01:07:27] or anything like that can you there? okay that answers that thank you so just to go back to the occupation the troublesome requirement for that is there a legislative change is that just want to be clear what is the nature that wouldn't require a legislative change no regulatory change not a legislative change that's an important distinction okay that's very helpful hey now thank you for your contribution this morning thank you for what you've done and do it's been great to have you on this morning thank you very much now last I submitted this morning Jeann who is on here good morning how are you how are you

[01:08:13] we've got five minutes with you yeah so my name is Yeta De Jong I live in Waipu in Northland I grew up in a little place called Korpoorahi in Haureke and I'm a Tata Treaty of Dutch descent so I was very concerned about the local elections for a number of reasons one is that my son who's male has always come to our place was dropped off the electoral role even though he's never changed his address so I'm just concerned about he's back on it now he's

[01:08:59] 23 years old I'm just concerned about what's going to happen next election where now the law has changed and people can't do same day enrolments or enrol within two weeks of an election what's going to happen if they've had paperwork to say they're on the electoral role and then they turn up and they're told they're not so I guess that's a concern that I'm looking to have answered in this process my other big concern is although I live in the Whangarei electorate the electorate next door to me is Kaipara and I'm aware that

[01:09:45] there was only 21 votes between the top two mayoral candidates but 288 special votes were disallowed and just listening to the previous conversation you know perhaps has helped to explain some things but I just don't really understand how a vote can be accepted as a special vote and then later disallowed because that person was not on the electoral role or their details weren't up to date because I just think to myself well if their details weren't up to date or they were not on the role why were they allowed to make the special vote and and yeah it just

[01:10:31] and then when the second candidate Snow Tani applied for a recount the judge disallowed it because they said well it would be more appropriate to run an inquiry into the wider conduct of the election but that also wasn't done so it just feels very much to me like because I'm aware that there are a large number of voters particularly Māori that fell off the roll and so they were often the ones doing the special votes so first Māori were dropped off the roll then when they made a special vote over 60% of them weren't counted and then when the results were questioned a judge didn't allow a review

[01:11:17] because the wrong question was asked it just feels very much like a deliberate campaign to prevent a Māori candidate from winning in that electorate which is known for its previous very racist anti Māori mayor and yeah so it's just questions I feel that I would like this inquiry to answer and I just feel that I don't feel satisfied with the results of the election particularly in the Kaipura area because I don't feel like they were fair and lastly I do support the use of community voting boxes and I use one myself

[01:12:03] but I would like to see more of them in smaller towns like Waipū because I had to drive 45 minutes each way to get to the nearest one and that's all I've got to say really and happy to answer questions or get answers to some of mine okay thank you for that contribution obviously the postal box is very interesting and I'm just going to say to you it's not the purpose of the select committee to look into specific issues like that we're dealing with the principles of better local government election voting process but thank you for bringing those to attention anyway alright right thank you that brings us to a close

[01:12:49] everyone we're now going to private session Sam and Nick I'm going to ask you to vacate the room as we put it
