[00:00:00] Good morning, everyone. It's great to be here. Thank you for inviting us to come along and talk about City Rail Link project. My name is John Bridgman. I'm the chair of City Rail Link Ltd. How are you? With me, I've got Pat, the CE. We're just going to run through quickly. I've got a few introductory marks and paddle follow-up with a little bit more detail. I've had leadership roles in the delivery of $15 billion worth of underground transport infrastructure. I'm immensely proud of the work that our team have done since we last met here to progress the project towards completion and public use.

[00:00:49] It's a very exciting time for us at City Rail Link Ltd. We are only about 60 days away from having the physical works complete and the final run-up to public use and the facility being open. This is great news for Aucklanders and New Zealand as a whole. We can look forward to the biggest transport transformation in Auckland since the Harbour Bridge. For the benefit of those members of the committee who are new to City Rail Link Ltd, we were established in 2010 and it's been our privilege to deliver the project for Auckland on behalf of sponsors, Auckland Council and the New Zealand Government.

[00:01:37] City Rail Link Ltd is a $5.5 billion, 3.45 kilometre underground railway that will transform how Auckland moves and unlock more frequent, reliable and high-capacity rail network in the city. By removing the central city termites at White and Matar and adding two new through stations in the central city, City Rail Link will make it far, far and easier for Aucklanders to access jobs, education, events and reduce traffic congestion on the road network and support a more vibrant, productive city centre and region. Once operational, trains will be running every four or five minutes at peak times through the central city and the capacity to transport 19,000

[00:02:29] 45 minutes and I'll have the capacity to transport up to 19,000 passengers per hour through the city central stations at opening. That capacity can grow to 36,000 per hour over time and when we get 36,000 and when we get nine cars implemented across the network it can grow to 54,000 passengers per hour at peak. The City Rail Link will also transform the transport landscape in Auckland, supporting the city's growing population and creating more places for people to live, work and play. Very proud of having delivered on the sponsor's vision

[00:03:18] contained within the project delivery agreement. This included an asset life of 100 years designed into the stations to provide safe, resilient, accessible and high capacity rail system for all that can be something people are proud of for years to come or decades to come. Planning and design that went into the project in the early days has enabled City Rail Link Limited to deliver a project that is world-class in design and distinctly New Zealand that generations to come can be proud of. City Rail Link will enable, sorry City Rail Link will challenge the notion that our infrastructure should only be minimalist, minimalist and functional by being an asset that reflects an Auckland

[00:04:09] that feels more like a grown-up city. Aucklanders will also benefit from scope and design refinement that have happened along the way since such as the decision in 2019 to increase the capacity of City Rail Link to allow nine car trains rather than the six that were originally in position in the business case. Extending the platforms at the three new stations and providing the additional station entrance at Veriford Square is a future focused decision that makes City Rail Link able to continue to deliver capacity as a population continues to grow on the city. So we're grateful of the support and advocacy as sponsors have provided throughout the life of the project.

[00:04:57] Regular supporting, regular reporting to sponsors through our sponsors representatives as well as monthly meetings with the mayor and minister has ensured a productive relationship with a no surprises approach. It's an exciting time for the project as I say is the majority of physical construction works are now complete. We're now in testing and commissioning phase and well advanced and all parties are working to complete the project and compete, get people on the trains in the coming months. Three new stations are finished and standing proudly in Auckland City Centre. I think some of you are even going to go and have a look at them tomorrow. And we remain on track to open the second in the second half of

[00:05:43] this year. It's possibly the Aucklanders. It's the Aucklanders I think. The rest of us. Move to Auckland. I might have to come up and say look, carry on. So we're just months away from Aucklanders being able to experience the benefits of CRL first hand. And as you would expect at this time, we face a lot of questions about exactly when will it open. While that decision, sorry, you're going to spill the beans now. While that decision sits, it's not my decision, unfortunately, while that decision sits with sponsors and operators, we're confident that the focus now is very much on getting to that finish line, having a safe, reliable railway that's ready for passengers in the near term.

[00:06:33] And we're looking forward to getting Aucklanders on board later this year. The relationship we've had with our delivery partners, Link Alliance, has been very good. It's been positive and constructive. There's been no secret that and as many projects of the scale, there's been normal commercial discussions underway with a for some time, which are now on the final stages of being completed. And we're confident to say that Link Alliance remains focused on achieving its contractual completion obligations by the end of June, or within a couple of days after, but more or less. And the project remains on track for completion within the approved funding envelope. I'd just like to take the opportunity to acknowledge the extraordinary effort

[00:07:20] that's gone into getting to the project to this point. This has been a long, complex program delivered in the heart of the city. Link Alliance and our other partners in Auckland Transport, Kiwi Rail, Auckland One Rail and the early completion works contractors, regulators and our emergency services have all done a sterling job to get here. We shouldn't underestimate how complex this project is. There are a few and I mean a handful in the region that are as large and as complicated and as difficult as this project is to do it in Auckland with a resource that's got no experience in projects of the scale. This complexity is really outstanding. And we've been studying the timelines, etc.

[00:08:08] Everyone says this project is late. Yes, we're not up to the projected timelines, but we're only six months late in a nine year project. So it's given the challenges we've had and we're inside the funding envelopes. The changes in price have only been scoped to a large extent. It's really an outstanding project. The legacy of City Rail Link is not only that we see in the stations, but also in the standard that we set and the way the infrastructure has been delivered in New Zealand. The benchmarks this project set in sustainability, social procurement, health and safety and mana when our partnership is something the team is immensely proud of and has been rewarded for with awards from various groups.

[00:08:56] These out these outcomes matter because they endure beyond the opening date of City Rail Link. They live, they leave Auckland with critical infrastructure, transport infrastructure and they've leave the sector stronger and more capable to deliver projects like this in the future. We have better skilled suppliers, more sustainable delivery practices and we can carry these into the next generation of projects. So Pat's going to touch on briefly a couple of just with respect, how much time is great, but how much more time I've finished. I was just going to say Pat, I was going to say because otherwise we won't have much time for questions. I don't know, we're happy to take questions.

[00:09:42] I've given you a high level. I think you've given us a high level. Pat, is there anything you desperately need to say? Sorry, I'm in a minute. No, I think John's covered most of it. I did want to point out that, you know, with our main contract to link lives, but lots of other contractors working with us, but it's FinC, Solntown, Fibachi, Downer, ACOM, Tonkin and Taylor, WSP, Oricon supporting us. A lot of key parties made the success that we've had. Very, very thankful for what we've achieved in the health and safety areas that that is one of our key paramount focuses. We've had a very strong health and safety record over a long period of time, and that's all credit to the contractors that we've worked

[00:10:28] and the high standards that they maintain over with the link alliance contract alone, 24 million hours worked and with a very strong health and safety performance. So perhaps I could leave it there. There'll be questions on the target hardship fund, which has been also a critical part of the project and is now now come to a close at the end of March and we're currently in our what we call our trial operations and emergency response testing phase. So we completed more recently the systems integration, all the systems working together and now focused on running the railway and the stations together, working very closely with Auckland Transport, Auckland Rail and Kiwi Rail. That started last week and we've also started our emergency

[00:11:15] response testing first test was last week. This will continue through through May and into early June. So that's the key phase that we're in right now. And if you come on site, you may come across one of these emergency scenarios being being being worked on. That's an example of fire on the train, fire on the tunnel. There are various scenarios that we run through working very closely with friends, police and St John's. And those partners are really critical for us also. So that's the stage right now. And so still a lot of key testing to go through. But we're in a very good place. Very useful addition there. I'm going to take you to Aucklanders first and then I'm going to go to further south, so to speak.

[00:12:01] Well, OK, you're tongue used to you as well. Yeah, OK, right, OK, cool, right. Hey, thanks, John and Patrick for your leadership and to your team as well. And that's been a massively complex project over many years. So on behalf of Auckland, we're really excited about finally being open. John probably knows if my question is probably diving into the when it's going to be open. So, you know, you've mentioned 60 days from now, the works completed, so it's 30 June. Does that mean that in terms of the disruption around a CBD, is that does that come to an end at 30 June? It's it's ended already.

[00:12:46] The disruption we've created has has been tidied up for some months for any road cones and nothing to do with us. OK, that's good to know. The t-shirt that says that any road cones. Not my road cones. It's largely. There were some precincts. There were some precinct works around the stations. Those were undertaken by by Auckland Transport. They've been completed also. We've had some openings, opening ceremonies and blessings around the precinct surrounding the three stations most. One of the one of the more recent ones was the Watamata Station Plaza that was opened up. And you might recall the glasswork just being cleaned and hasn't been cleaned for about 10 years. But we know to open that up and similarly at the other stations.

[00:13:33] But that those are open now and available to the public where possible. We've pulled back fences and tried to give the public as much space as possible. And in terms of open for the public, are you targeting particular month or particular quarter of the year? You're trying, aren't you? It's really not our call. There's a there's quite a number of steps that 18 need to go through. Both internally and externally. There's a process for trying to land those issues that's current at the moment and. It's imminent. So that's the last question on timing. OK, and then finally,

[00:14:19] just reflecting on the project. I mean, you know, looking back, reflections on key learnings for the project. You know, we've delivered it within the funding envelope, but it had to be increased. But any takeaways on key learnings throughout how to execute this? We're planning to undertake a lessons learned study that will be done within within this year. We're underway scoping that out and have discussed it with the sponsors, in terms of that. So that'll cover a wide range of project activities so that we can take lessons, they're all lessons learned in projects and that will benefit future infrastructure projects in New Zealand. So at a high level, were you, you know,

[00:15:06] any that you can allude to for the committee? I think the critical ones are trying to define the scope appropriately. Or how a project like this fits within a programme of work that's because the scope was increased significantly after we started, and that's always been hard for people to get their heads around. And there's still questions about some of the follow on work that's necessary in terms of level crossings and other network improvements to be able to achieve the capacity the project offers. So that idea of how a project that fits within a programme is really important to an understanding what that programme means over time. So stakeholders, particularly sponsors and owners

[00:15:52] can understand what that looks like in the form of time. The other thing, the other big lesson I think is the joint venture between the Crown and Council, in this instance, has been really helpful. The buy-in and accountability arrangements that delivers is very powerful for the project and supports the project very well. And so it's a model, I think, that's valuable. If you look at major projects around the world, they would say getting local authority buy-in to a big project like this, if it's centrally funded, it is fundamental to success. And the joint venture has done that very well. And so I think that's... I'm just going to keep on going around.

[00:16:38] I'll call us then Stevie then Son. So for me, those are the two very big issues that come out, Stevie Ramon. Thank you. Very technical question. How many total tests won't be incomplete so far? And what is the issues or risk being identified during the testing? Well, I think through the systems testing with over 16,000 tests, it's probably a bit higher than that now, and we're a few. We're probably about 99% through those tests. I think that we haven't had any, what I would call fatal flaws through the testing. We've had issues. We'll always have issues. You have some tests that fail, and you have to go back and do the retest until you succeed. That just takes time. We haven't had anything, though,

[00:17:23] that's been a major impact on program, for example. It is just getting through the volume. You need a little bit of luck along the journey as well with the testing, but overall, it's gone very well. So that means the system haven't been tested under different scenarios, including disruption or crisis situation, or how the system is being performed in those situations? That's sort of what we're doing now. The trial operations, there are a number of tests that were undertaken right at this moment again through to June. That's including, for example, if there was a power failure or infrastructure issue with the stations or the rail network, and then the emergency response testing such as a fire in the train.

[00:18:10] So those tests started at the beginning of actually last week, and we'll continue through the first week of June. Beyond that, Auckland Transport and Auckland One Rail as the rail operator, we'll continue just to keep running the trains, keep getting familiar with the asset and the systems, and just ensuring that they're very comfortable to be able to open the railway in a safe and reliable manner. So you also mentioned in your opening remarks that you have been tested for integration with the existing rail network. Is it including other passenger and freight services, or is it including all the P.R.s as well? Oh, there's the whole network timetable, but I think when we talk about that systems integration, it's integration with the existing system that Auckland Transport have

[00:18:55] and the system that, and the new systems that we're providing. So it's integrating them. If you take Waitemata station, for example, existing station, it's our systems integrating with the existing system at Waitemata. We are fortunate that Honeywell are a key systems provided to Auckland Transport already. They're also assisting us with our station systems, which does facilitate that connectivity. And also covers the wider rail network system. So signalling communications, train monitoring, et cetera. Just the last question. On time performance against the Panned Town Table. How does it look like during the testing? The timetable testing's gone. On time performance. Yes, it's gone well.

[00:19:42] We had timetable testing in January this year, and then most recently, the week of April 13th to 15th, that timetable testing's led by Auckland Transport, Auckland Rail and Kiwiro. But the last testing that we did in April was successful. And that's based on a certain number of trains per hour. That's running a greater number of trains on the network. And that testing has gone well. I think it leads into confidence around the timetable when we eventually open. Excellent. Thank you. Celia. Thank you. Very interesting. I did want to ask about the Targeted Hardship Fund. This is a much smaller project. It's often asked for. We don't always do it. That 12 million, was that 50-50 from the council

[00:20:29] and from government? Yes. OK. And has it all been spent? It was spent 10.7 million out of 12. OK. With the funds... So the most goes back to... Goes back to when the fund was established in 2021. And it's supported 72 businesses over that time. Great. And did you have... Obviously, you've got criteria for that. Was there anything that you would change about the criteria? Or worked pretty well? I think overall it served its purpose and we're proud of how we managed that fund. It was a difficult time for businesses because it wasn't just the disruption caused by the project. As you know, we had COVID and then we had the economic challenges the country had.

[00:21:16] So it's been sympathetic to the businesses. It's been a difficult journey for them. But I think that the Targeted Hardship Fund was critical. Great. Really important element and something that we would encourage for other projects, particularly if you're having to do a project in the middle of a central business district. It's not easy for businesses. So we part of our lessons learned with what we do later in the year. The take-off... We'll have to see that. At some point, I had a couple more questions. You know, I was born in London, so I grew up using the Tube and the difference between the old, old stations and some of the new ones, like the Jubilee line and the Queen Elizabeth line, just startling. And so I'm quite excited to come to Auckland at some point.

[00:22:02] But we've talked about the connection with other trends. Could you clarify, for example, if I do want to come up, I'd like to know where the Northern Explorer's now going to come to? Is that been...? That's something I'm not sure. You need to ask Kiwi Rail like that. I think there's a... Just clarify, City Rail Link is a connection within the Auckland Rail network. So the existing metro trains that they have in Auckland will continue. They just run differently. So there's a different timetable and a different configuration of the way the trains all run. So it means something. Yeah, they just use the infrastructure

[00:22:48] to be able to get better use out of the existing network. The other trains that run around the country won't get as far as City Rail Link. It's a facility. It's a link within the Auckland Metro train network. Hopefully we'll be able to connect. We're more question-close. OK, and the last one was, do you think this network is like future-proofed for the next 30 years that you don't see those, oh, I wish we'd also added on this, or gone further or put another station? Is there any thought that he's going to need any expansion? Sorry, I didn't quite finish this one, but, you know... No, no, there isn't really room to put in another station.

[00:23:36] They're quite close together, as it is. Yeah. The future-proof pieces that have been added Beresford Entrance was a big addition, and that's quite a critical piece. The major bit was putting in the capacity for nine cars, and that will stand a much greater test of time than what the six-car capacity would? Go on. Thank you. Well, actually, thank you. My questions are around the capacity and the peak passenger capacity. You've talked 19,000 passengers per hour at opening, growing to 36 per hour over time, and then 54,000 to the nine-car. So can you just explain the sort of timeframe,

[00:24:22] scope, and opportunities of when that is likely to kick in in terms of hitting the nine-car metric? The nine-car thing... Well, I think the forecasts sort of talk about 2040 for six-car capacity in that sort of timeframe. Now, those depend very much on what point in time you start. Some... When there was a higher passenger transport use just prior to COVID, people were saying, well, that might be a hitter bit earlier. If you go back a little bit earlier in time, then they would say that peak may be later. So trying to project what that forward growth is going to be

[00:25:08] is quite tricky. The 54,000 is... You have to put in nine-car capacity across the network. So before you can hit that sort of volume, and that's quite an investment. But you don't have to go digging up Auckland to do it when you do do it because that investment has been made now. Well, on opening will be the car capacity? 19,000. And how many cars? Oh, six. Well, Auckland Network only has six car capacity at the moment. Yeah. Yeah, that was all right. That'll be platform-based, won't it? Yes. So just interested as to how the relationship and performance issues that were experienced with the operators of the system,

[00:25:55] with Q-Rail and AT, if you're on a project you've been resolved, and are you comfortable with that they're going to be in a position to take over the assets that you've built? Yes, yes. Yeah, we've worked very closely with them since the inception of the relations restaurant. We established what we called, I was going to touch on earlier, one client alliance which essentially ourselves, Q-Rail, AT, and Auckland Runt together, working together. We called again, it's an informal alliance, but we called the one client, so we speak with one voice, to improve collaboration and the way we interact with the alliance, the client's contractor. And I think generally that's gone really well. The collaboration between all the parties has been really positive and strong. Okay. An earlier lessons, LUD report,

[00:26:40] carried out by Infrastructure Commission, found that there were some gaps, and it wasn't as strong as it could have been earlier on on the project lifecycle. So are you saying that there's been significant or resolution of some of those issues that were identified? Yes. And as Pat said, one client alliance was a major part in doing that. It addressed a whole series of some of those issues, the governance gaps, but also supported the project, particularly in the system space, to overcome the need for each of the entities to have their own advice in that area. The systems piece was able to be dealt with at a project level much more effectively. And that's all to do with integration and how the project at the end of the day works.

[00:27:26] Kiwi Rail are effectively running the network, the tunnels now, and the rail part of the project. Whilst the asset hasn't been handed over to them, they control it at the stage, and that's working seamlessly. There's about 18,000 trips through the tunnel so far of trains. Okay. Fascinating. So just in terms of the lessons learned, wrap up what you're planning to do. Will you be involving Infrastructure Commission in that, given that they've already done Report 1 and Report 2? We haven't chosen a party to undertake the report yet. We're in the process of trying to select someone to help us with that, but obviously having someone with rail experience,

[00:28:12] but we're just going through that process right now to select a party to work with us. And we'll obviously be very happy to coordinate with the Infrastructure Commission. We want to build on those studies that have been done before. Yeah, I think that's really important, because given all the challenges the project had, including COVID shutdowns and changes in scope, being able to bring it in within the budget on budget, relatively on time, it's a wonderful achievement if that's what's delivered. I think it'd be incredibly helpful for the rest of the public sector delivering infrastructure to get those insights and to be able to have that shared. That's definitely the plan to share those insights externally. Absolutely. Good. A couple of quick questions from me.

[00:28:59] First one, just the net work integration. We're all familiar with the issue that there's a whole bunch of crossings that need road crossings that need to be addressed one way or the other. It's going to take quite a while to roll that out. Can you just talk to us just generally about how the CRL integrates and how really, we know the KiwiR has been doing lots of hard thing up the tracks and so on and doing that sort of work, but how really the system is to cope with that level of growth. We've gone from the, you know, we've got the 54,000 passengers, except for if we get to that sort of stage, the system is a whole being able to deal with that sort of growth. Or is that just something that's sort of beyond your... That's really... I think you'd need to address that more with KiwiR. Obviously, there are some very big changes that need to happen

[00:29:46] around level crossings, stations across the network, worry other bottlenecks that exist. And that investment is predicated, but you're talking quite a period of time before you want to make that. But to maximise the benefit from CRL, there are some other changes which are required. If you want to get to that level, is there that level of demand? That's a different matter. Yeah, and that sort of... So you've got a chicken and egg. The point is that a decision was made in 2018, really, in 2018 that we don't want to go back and have to retrofit those stations. No, basically, please. Along with the provision for platforms, platform screen doors which enable driverless trains,

[00:30:34] you can't get to driverless trains without that, and it would be difficult to put that in later. That's good. And that's a scope change as well. Yes. So there are a number of scope changes. The platform length, the bearers for entrance, and that. Platform screen doors and some other connection issues around Britomart. So because the budget for the project was increased at one point, is that a reasonable reflection of the increases in the scope? Yes. Yes. So we want it more, we paid for more, we got more. I mean, we put the structure in place for a platform, for the platform screen doors, obviously, and the structure's there to avoid disruption further down the track of whether it had been major disruption and if it closed the restations. It's not easy to do when it's closed. If you go back to the original business case,

[00:31:21] it was 2.5 billion in 2015. There's been 1.6 billion worth of scope changes, whether it be Bearers Street, platform screen doors, all those sort of things that we've talked about today. 1.6 billion. There's about 700 million in cost of a year's delay on COVID. And a couple of 100 million or 300 million on increased risk and completely against what was understood at that original business case and some property and corporate cost issues that are about 400 million. And that's due to the 5.5 that we're currently in. It's good to have that break, Daniel. Thank you. And the other question was just about the staff,

[00:32:08] the contractors have worked on the project. And one of the things we talked about a lot is pipeline. And we know that one element then there was some coverage of that about tunnelers and we said, OK, we've done our tunneling. Brilliant. And now there are no more tunneling jobs in New Zealand, so we're off somewhere else. That happens. But just generally, I mean, it's a big project. How is that? And you've got the other big project in Auckland, which is the airport. And just how is the workforce? What are you seeing of the workforce flowing through into other projects and just how that's been managed? I can possibly, I mean, we're based in the same building as the contractors, so we see the comings and goings. Obviously, there's a lot of demobilisation of staff

[00:32:53] from the contractor side. The Australian market's pretty active. That's still very busy from an infrastructure perspective. So opportunities will be there. I know a lot of companies will be looking at the PPP up north and opportunities have come out of that selection process. And so that will create... Yes, that will create opportunities. But naturally, as you've got international companies, they have to go to where the workers. And if they're specialist workers, they will often have to repatriate or show or go back. I do know from interacting with these workers on a daily basis that they've loved working here. I've really enjoyed New Zealand and working on the project. But unfortunately, we will see a lot of them leave because of their specialist skills.

[00:33:39] And as you mentioned, Andy, the tunnelers, for example, that was some time ago. OK, that's very helpful. I think we are at time very much. Really appreciate it. I hope you enjoyed taking some of our Auckland colleagues around. Unfortunately, I've got a board meeting tomorrow. Oh, well, you know, but if there's a possibility of the rest of us being organised, could we... No, that's always possible. I think he said Aucklandised. LAUGHTER I think I said Auckland guys, I think. Anyway, would you like to do that, colleagues? The offer is always there. OK, I think we will arrange it. OK, yeah, sounds good. Thank you. Really appreciate it. Thank you. Go well with the rest of the project. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thanks for your support.
