[00:00:00] We will let you start off with some introductory comments and then we can keep those to several minutes. We can go into questions from others. Thank you. Kia ora. Thank you very much. As we've appeared in front of you a couple of times in the last six months, my intention is really in my opinion remarks to briefly bring to your attention a few highlights and obviously leave the rest of the time for questions. Before I do that, I want to take the opportunity to introduce you as with me. So on my left, Deputy Commissioner Dr Vanessa Corrill, Vanessa's responsibility is for the operations team and she has the

[00:00:47] delegations for mental health and addictions and prisoner complaints. On my right, Rose Wall groans as the Deputy Commissioner for Disability and also has the statutory delegations for decision-making and maternity health as well as mesh complaints and for the past 10 months, Rose has also been managing the aged care files. Natata Davidson in the rear is our Chief Advisor and is often starter and will help us with some of the tricky questions when they arise. So just turning to some of those highlights. Firstly, clearing the backlog of open complaints and proving the timeliness of our process has been our focus particularly in the context of funding reduction. We've streamlined our process

[00:01:35] considerably and in 24-25 we increased our number of closures by 40%. Over the past 15 months we have reduced our number of open complaints, so our backlog by 50%, and we have a clear backlog plan to close the older files within our system. We are consistently closing more complaints than we have received for the first time since 2015 with a clearance rate currently of about 117%. This has allowed us to reduce the number of files aged over two years by 52% in the past 15 months. Approximately 80% of our complaints are closed in six months and current forecast suggests that by the end of 2026 we'll be in the position to close incoming

[00:02:23] complaints requiring a formal investigation within 18 to 24 months which we consider to be an appropriate time frame given the complexity of those complaints and given that that is a quasi-judicial process. The Committee will be pleased to hear that on the 30th of March we implemented our new digital case management system. Our staff, given it's only been four weeks, are still in the process of learning to navigate that system that we anticipate that it will embed and deliver further efficiencies. I'm very proud of my team for achieving these results in the context of ongoing increase in complaints volume and the reduced funding this year. Currently complaints volumes are sitting

[00:03:11] around about 12% higher than the previous year. Complaints tend to reflect people's concerns around constrained and delayed access to care, poor communication in the context of those delays and difficulties navigating a constrained and complex system. In terms of our role in quality improvement in 24-25 we made 809 recommendations with a 91% compliance rate. As the Committee may be aware our previous aged care commissioner resigned in August 2025. Erin James has recently been appointed to that position in early April so she's only a few weeks into the role and we'll be working closely with Erin to establish her priorities and recommendations for the

[00:04:00] sector to improve the quality of care for older people. I've taken note of the Committee's recent reports into HDC's resourcing and the petition into the establishment of a patient safety commissioner. I accept that unexpected increases in complaints volume in the context of constrained resources have had an impact on our ability to undertake rapid systemic inquiries and I acknowledge the select Committee's concerns about this. Such inquiries are an ongoing focus for me and as we clear our backlog I will be exploring ways in which we can do this more effectively within the current resources. In the meantime HDC has worked hard to leverage the things and complaints

[00:04:45] for quality improvement through the publication of the matter reports. These reports seek to amplify consumer voice and make associated recommendations for improvement. We have recently released a report on the experience of disabled people in the context of residential care settings. We're about to release another report on the experience of disabled people in the health sector and we have focused on the experience of disabled people noting the inequities that that population does suffer as well as the fact that we have a unique jurisdiction and that we cover both the health and disability sectors and we've been very pleased by the response of the relevant agencies to our recommendations from those reports. Happy to talk

[00:05:33] more about those as we go through. And finally an ongoing focus for me is on ensuring the sustainability of the community. I'm going to focus for me is on ensuring the sustainability of the advocacy service. Under the HDC Act HDC through its director of advocacy is required to contract on behalf of the Crown an advocacy service. The contract currently sits with the National Advocacy Trust. The advocacy service plays an important role in supporting complainants to resolve their concerns. They also reduce demand on provider complaints processes and resolve low risk complaints so that HDC resources can be focused on those complaints that require our intervention. However, static funding of that service

[00:06:21] and that's funded through our baseline has reduced in recent years and sorry the size of that has caused the size of the service to reduce in recent years and currently we're concerned about the multiple geographical gaps in that service. So I'll be looking in the coming year to see how we can address those concerns. That concludes my opening remarks and I'm happy to take any questions. Thank you very much for those open remarks. Can I? Thank you. I've just got a question regarding your recommendations and the following of them or compliance with them. How many sort of, how many complaints feed into a recommendation? Have you got some situations where you've had one

[00:07:07] complaint that's led to a recommendation? Have you got ones that have got a thousand complaints? What's the sort of measures on that? And then I've got a follow-up question. Okay, so whenever we receive a complaint, particularly if it comes into our system, so it tends to be that the more serious complaints or complaints on which we need to seek information, we will always consider the potential for quality improvement from those complaints. So on individual complaints, we can make both educational comments, suggestions for improvement and all recommendations. So recommendations can either be made on those complaints that don't proceed through to a formal investigation. If we see a cluster of complaints, we often leverage previous complaints where recommendations have been made

[00:07:55] to re-emphasise existing recommendations. And for example in our thematic reports, we were looking at complaints trends. We use the complaints trends to identify appropriate recommendations and make them to the appropriate agencies. I also want to make clear that we analyse the responses to our recommendations very closely. And if we're not satisfied that they've been complied with, we will engage with the provider to make sure that the risk to which those recommendations were directed have been appropriately mitigated. That's interesting. So you've got actually more scales than just making a recommendation. Have you got a rip in this report? I didn't see a rip. So educational comment measure of how many of those you've put out versus how many, what was it,

[00:08:43] suggestions for improvement? Is there a measure of that? I don't have the exact numbers on that. I'm turning to my chief advisor because she is. Roughly. So roughly we make around about 800 recommendations a year, which are the ones we follow up on. And then there's probably an additional, I would say, around 300 complaints upon which we make what we call educational comment, which is where we're making one that you could reflect on your communication. And is there a suggestion slash comment or a suggestion another scale above? Suggestion is actually another scale. How many levels do you get? Again, I think there's probably encapsulated in the educational comments, but there is certainly some data that we could follow up. And then the next question that was once you've made the recommendation that

[00:09:31] you've got 91% compliance, you've said you've made the talk to the agencies. I mean, you guys are kind of the police force in a way. Who's the prosecuting agency? Sorry, can you... Well, you guys are kind of the police force. You've found the thing and said this is a recommendation that we often do and 91% are followed from that 9% that aren't. You've got in here about some of the steps you have taken. So, where's the teeth in that? Does it go? Does it have to get political enforcement? Can you make issues go to the ministry that then come down from another direction? What do you do at that point? I think it's really important to understand the reasons why recommendations might not be complied with. So, in the first instance there may be practical reasons. Things may have changed since we made the

[00:10:19] recommendation, which make it more difficult for the provider to complete the recommendation that we've suggested. In those cases, as I said, we engage with the providers to see whether there needs to be modification to the recommendation or in the terms of recommendation. For those complaints where we don't receive a response, for example, we have the option of naming the provider, which is taken quite seriously by providers, and we can escalate to the regulatory bodies. So, for example, if they're a registered provider, we can take the non-compliance recommendations to the regulatory authority who can take action on that. Who's that? So, for example, if it was a doctor, we could raise a non-compliance with recommendations to the medical council. Thank you. Can I go to a primary? Oh, you've got us up? Yes, sure.

[00:11:07] Can you, I see in the report, 809 was the number of recommendations made, and a 91% response rate for the year 24-25 years in your annual report. So, on the ones that are not followed, how often would you identify that the regulatory authority needs to, responsible authority needs to be contacted about a practitioner? I'm just trying to think of the, so we know that of the 66, those that were not complied with included 66 recommendations made across 37 complaints

[00:11:55] in evolving 34 providers, which included 17 individuals. I'm sorry, I don't currently have the... Sorry, can you please come up to the microphone? The individual might not comply, because they've actually retired. So, it might be that after the recommendation was made to that individual to undertake training, they then retired from the workforce. That's the primary reason. I think what I'm trying to get at, Mr Chair, is it's very helpful, because we've had questions about this issue at committee before. So, it's helpful to have it presented this way, that the number, the compliance rate, that's useful.

[00:12:43] But is this a one-off analysis done for this annual report? Or would you be aware across multiple years, if the same practitioner was coming up with recommendations against them, and is there a process by which you initiate action? Absolutely. We always look to see what previous complaints have been made against providers as soon as the complaint comes in. So, we do monitor that. We also have, and I'm sure that our digital case management systems is going to assist us, that we analyse the recommendations really carefully. And if there is repetitive non-compliance, we could also potentially consider reopening a Right 10

[00:13:31] inquiry, which is around the importance of responding to complaints, the right to have a proper complaints process and, of course, as I said, we've previously named providers as well as a consequence of failure to comply. And that is taken quite seriously by the providers concerned. Vanessa, did you have anything further on that? Not as, so far as individual providers concerned, but just to pick up on Morag's earlier point, that we do assess the number of complaints for providers on receipt of a complaint. And we do have agreements with regulatory authorities in relation to a threshold of a number of complaints in any given period of time would trigger us

[00:14:19] to immediately advise, for example, the medical council that we have received that number of complaints. Thank you. Thanks, thank you. And you mentioned during your opening statement that you've cleared the backlog by 50%. So, noting that, and also in your report, there's 25% of opening complaints are older than 24 months. How many of those are older than three years? Five, another, of those 23%, 5% are over three years. So, obviously, you've increased the number of complaints closed quite drastically. What has changed

[00:15:05] to lead to that closure rate increasing? So, there's been a number of steps that we've taken. There's been structural change. So we made, we had a leadership restructure. We've focused on looking at where there have been bottlenecks in our system and we've streamlined the complaints process. We've looked at ways to increase performance internally. We've increased training opportunities for our staff as well. I'm just trying to look, and I'll hand it to Vanessa because she has been managing the backlog. And we've got a clear backlog plan against which we measure accountability at any point in time. So we have, there's been

[00:15:53] some very concerted effort, particularly because we are obviously concerned about not just the number of cases on hand, but the delays in the system. I mean, what role do you think your new IT system is going to play? I didn't quite catch that. What role do you think your new IT system is going to play? I think it's going to, once again, improve our processes in terms of producing duplication or replication of processes. I think it's going to have a really important role to play in terms of communication with our complainants and our providers in the context of more automated responses, whereas previously that was not possible under our old system. It's also going to have a very significant impact, I think, in our ability to report on our data.

[00:16:41] So we're going to be able to mine data more easily. Next slide, please. Help me understand your definition of the backlog and therefore as observers of complaints and reports on complaints, we might see people's experience change. So are you measuring the backlog as from the time of receipt to the time of reporting and therefore does the very small number of complaints over three years mean that we'll cease seeing reports from, I think I read one from 2022 just the other day. So can you help me understand what we should expect to see? So I think firstly

[00:17:29] providers have already reported back to us that they've seen significant improvement in our turnaround of our early resolution files. Their complaints, which we can do immediately back to the provider to resolve to our advocacy service. So we've virtually got no backlog in that space. We're able to turn those around really quickly. There is unquestionably a situation where we're currently working through our older complaints at 2022 files. We're working on our 2023 files and so on. And that has resulted therefore in increased numbers of those older complaints being closed and therefore being more publicly available, I guess. We expect that by the end of this calendar

[00:18:17] year we will have exclude all our 2023 files. That's correct isn't it? And return to a business usual state and I think it's about the time frames within which you could expect a complaint to be resolved and as I said in that more serious end that's 18 to 24 months. In the standard experience of someone complaining to the system, we see that isn't it the more serious end? What would their time to resolution be? Or time to a report being published? We're currently closing 80% within six months in our early resolution space. But there obviously are complaints that we bring into the system that we seek more information on. So that accounts

[00:19:05] probably for another 20%. And we would expect to close those in probably within nine to 12 months. Is that correct? Six to nine months and we have kept that. So part of the backlog elimination plan was to avoid another backlog occurring with the incoming complaints. So since July 2 last year we have kept to all incoming complaints have met those time frames. So closure for our assessed complaints is non-investigation complaints within that period of six to nine months and investigations within 18 months. Okay. Jenny, are you a primary or a

[00:19:53] sub? A sub. Okay, go for it. I'm just interested. Thank you very much. In the complexity of complaints you've been receiving, has there been an increase in the number of more? Are you seeing some of the more complaints coming through in the last 12 months? Again, you sort of cut out a bit there. So you're wanting to know whether there's been a change in the profile of the complaints that we're seeing? Yes. Any greater complexity in complaints coming through? I think in the past a few years it would be fair to say, given the complexity of the provision of healthcare, so multi-disciplinary approaches to healthcare, there has unquestionably been I think a rising

[00:20:41] complexity and new models of provision of care as well. So for example telehealth, we're seeing some emerging issues in telehealth provisions, some of which we do have concerns about, for example internet prescribing of medications in the absence of having clinical notes or knowing comorbidities or other medications that the person is on. In terms of the demographic of complaints though, actually the demographic is moving in accordance with what we've previously seen. So in terms of, say for example GP practice, they're still sitting roughly at about 30% of the complaints that we receive, likewise Health New Zealand at about 40%. What we have seen is an increased number of complaints

[00:21:29] relating to delay and access to medication and around that. Alright, Cam, you had a primary? Yeah, thank you. I just got a quick... Then Kahu and then I should as well. Well, I'm not entirely sure this is in your scope, so that's why I just want to ask. Do you do complaints about under-service? Do you deal with complaints that are deemed to be sort of, this is supposed to be, you've been contracted as an entity or a group to provide our service provided to the contract level? How much do you take in complaints? Or where, if not you, where does it go if someone is concerned that they're not getting a level of service that a group has been contracted to do? Yes, we do

[00:22:17] and so in the context where we are aware that under-service, I mean we measure care against the code of rights. Okay. So if a person isn't receiving a reasonable standard of care, that's potential non-compliance with right for, we look to the reasons why that is the case and we would make recommendations. So for example of Health New Zealand has contracted a particular service and we're concerned that a level of care hasn't been provided in accordance with the reasonable standard of care, we will alert that to Health New Zealand. And so would, like, how many of these concerns about under-delivery on a contract are you discovering and alerting Health New Zealand

[00:23:05] or other contracting services for? And I'm sure this is the case, but is it the only case that you're getting these from complaints? So are you getting them from complaints then you're finding under-delivery of contract? And then who are you saying that to? You're saying that to Health New Zealand, are they monitoring their own contracts? Absolutely. And we escalate concerns too. So if we had an immediate concern about a safety concern under-delivery which was causing harm, we would escalate that immediately and follow that up. So we do... Not so much about the safety, but are people actually not providing, so an area might have one provider for a contract and that's not getting delivered in opposed to the contract. That would seem like a health

[00:23:53] issue, it would seem like a safety issue, broadly, that that contract's not being delivered. I guess I'm asking, like, when you find waste, forward and abuse, are you reporting that in a structure that we could, as parliamentarians, see that there's this much waste, forward and abuse happening in the health contracting system? Are you individually putting that to Health New Zealand and other contracting agencies? How does financial waste, forward and abuse get reported? Hmm. So you're talking about financial wastage in the context of contracted service provision? Well, I'm asking, what do you do with that information when you find it? I'm assuming you do find it. Moira, could I add a bit more? Certainly we'd understand the experience, an individual's experience, so if a provider was

[00:24:41] to support 15 people and one of those people complained to us about their experience, we'd know about that. We wouldn't know if 14 other people didn't receive this contracted service that they should have. So we'd be able to contribute in one perspective, but not in that other. So do you have a final question, if there may? Do you have a sort of sister commissioning agency that provides waste, forward, commissioner that looks at waste, forward and abuse that you can talk to that you've got an open line of communication with, that contract's not being delivered on, contracted, being reported to? Or is that relying on the contracting entity, the Health New Zealand Ministry, health to look into?

[00:25:29] It's reliant on the contracting entity. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah, thank you. I want to talk about the complaints made and you talked about different demographics, so GPs, other services. Do you have the data around like breaking those down so and to say, maternal very post-natal health, youth mental health seniors, do you have though that sort of data and if you do, has there been an increase in any specific area of complaints in that 24 to 25 period? Do you collect ethnicity data, age data

[00:26:17] from our complaints, forms? By the way, we are going to be in a much better position to report on that now that we have this new system. I would say that we haven't seen any noticeable increases that have caused us concern to raise issues in any particular demographic. I'm going to turn to Natasha in a moment. That said, we do see things in complaints. Even if it might be one or two complaints, we think actually there's an issue here and we need to raise it. And it's unfortunate. So I think last time I was here, there was mention around, for example, youth line and issues that we saw in terms of risk to

[00:27:05] youth as consequence of concerns that we had around risk escalation in clinical governance. I'm just going to check with Natasha. Have we got any? No, you're right. So our data is really largely qualitative because it's people's experience, right? So there hasn't been, we do have a close eye on numbers. So there hasn't been a spike necessarily in any area. But what we do pay close attention to is the themes and where we so whether an issue, there's been an increase in an issue. So for example, delays or in certain service areas where we've seen recurring things that is also of concern to us. Thank you. And so in those recurring themes areas, do you then break it down into

[00:27:53] things like wait times? Like that's where that's broken down. Awesome. So I'm getting it. Yes, that's correct. And then do you do any forecasting in terms of where the data is actually quantitative and it's going into looking at the increased crisis with youth mental health. And then looking at how many people are actually complaining and saying, hmm, actually maybe the young people don't know about this complaints process and what advocacy can we do to then get them to have this service. So part of advocacy would be making sure that people know that they can do it. And I know the ombudsman has done a lot of that work.

[00:28:41] So yeah, so I guess that's a too long question. It's about making do you see what's happening out there. So for example, with the maternal mental health peri-imposonatal mental health and youth mental health. And then sort of forecast what you could expect and then look at actually what you are getting. It would be fair to say that we do very closely monitor what's happening, not even just in terms of our complaints data. So you can actually see issues arise through the media. Other agencies might bring them to our attention as well. We don't necessarily forecast, but we can monitor and I completely agree with you. Part of the

[00:29:29] issue is also identifying those populations that don't complain to us. That's actually personally, as commissioner, I do find that quite concerning. And you look to see how can we improve the advocacy or education for those communities. We do rely on advocacy service in the current environment to do a lot of the networking. And they do thousands of networking opportunities a year focused on particular priority populations and educational sessions as well. In the context of our funding constraints we have had to make a strategic decision to focus on our complaints resolution rather than our education and promotion duties because they are statutory duties.

[00:30:17] That said, we also, we do look for opportunities and we engage with other agencies for them to raise issues with us. For example, recently I met with the Children's Commissioner, for example. Thank you. And so I really appreciate your work. It's so important. So just so I understand in terms of say legislation that might be coming through, do you do any forecasting and do ministers reach out to you or do you advocate to ministers or ministries around what you're seeing and where improvements might need to happen? Probably a good example of that was the passage of the End of Life Choice Act because we knew

[00:31:05] that when that legislation was coming into force that HDC had a specific role to manage complaints in that space. As it happened, we didn't receive as many complaints as we had anticipated that we might. That said, we were very closely, particularly at the time that the act came into force with the relevant agencies and we continue obviously as required under that legislation to report to the registrar on the complaints that we are seeing. And continually in our quarterly reports to the ministry and minister highlight those kind of issues. Fantastic. So did they ever reach out to you? Please come through the chair. Oh, I'm so sorry. Could I please have two more supplementaries? Turn off subs. Keep them concise.

[00:31:53] It's a good challenge. Absolutely. So has there been particular wait time and delay to access complaints around maternal mental health and around youth mental health? Access issues specifically, maternal mental health. And like wait lists? Wait list times? Not that I'm aware of in terms of complaints. The maternity complaints tend to relate to the provision of care. Wonderful. Thank you. That does feature that often in maternity complaints there are multiple issues and there may be a feature of maternal mental health but that's not normally the

[00:32:41] main feature of the complaint. Sure thing. And in terms of forecasting, you've talked about budget constraints having an impact on the complaints that are coming in. Have you done any forecasting for this financial year from 2425 into 2627 around what you are expecting with budget constraints? We've obviously been doing some budget planning but we feel confident that we can maintain our current level of service in relation to our complaints resolution. Thank you so much. And that's in the context too of increasing complaint volume. Incredible work. Thank you. Dr Vera. Thank you.

[00:33:29] Thanks for your remarks in your opening statement recognizing the need to take up more systemic inquiries. You mentioned the MATIC reports. Book us through the difference, please. And then going back to the systemic issues, where do you think you'd like to where is the potential scope for your next investigation to go? The MATIC reports we rely on our existing data to look at what the common themes we are seeing in the complaints data that we have. So we've done the two disability reports we are anticipating that we may do one on maternity services later in the year and we're considering also mental health report as well.

[00:34:17] So that's looking at the existing data and looking at opportunities to make recommendations on that data based on the themes that we're seeing. We also do commissioner initiated investigations. I think I mentioned that in my last appearance. And that might be on one complaint but it might be on a cluster of complaints where we look to see whether there are any and firstly resolution for complaints themselves but also looking at often systemic issues that may have contributed to the events that gave rise to the complaint. I think in terms of future we have been quite thoughtful about where you might look to broader systemic inquiries

[00:35:05] going forward. I think what we would need to do is develop some kind of matrix to identify the priorities in the health sector. I think at the moment if you were to do a systemic issue looking more broadly across the whole of New Zealand, one of the biggest issues would be in and around resource constraints, the constraint system, workforce issues. And that's all kinds of provision of service. So it might be ophthalmology, it might be gynecology, it might be surgery or cancer care. So it's quite difficult to work out where you focus it but that's something we are going to consider. Thank you. And one of the

[00:35:53] discussions relevant to a petition the committee received is let's say under resourcing that you just mentioned as an example. Well, understaffing might feature quite prominently in complaints. So that also raises a number of regulatory and resourcing things which traditionally aren't the subject of your reports in a systemic inquiry. Is that the sort of information you can go into or not? Well, whenever we look at a complaint in these issues around for example staffing levels or resourcing constraints within the system that they service that we're looking at,

[00:36:41] we can make comment on those and in fact I have escalated concerns. Let's take ophthalmology, I raised concerns with the minister about service level, where demand was outstruck in capacity at the ophthalmology service at Waitaha, Canterbury because it was having a direct impact on consumers and there was the potential harm to be caused to them. I can't influence or I try to influence funding decisions but ultimately funding decisions rests with the minister but what I can do is tell the patient stories and identify the potential harm that flows in the context, in that particular context and then I follow up with recommendations to see what is being done about the resourcing constraints in that particular service.

[00:37:29] Thank you. My second primary, Mr Chair, small number of complaints that you received but sadly still too many will be the sexual exploitation of patients by practitioners. Can you explain the HDC's role in that and what I'm particularly interested in is how many fora a complainant needs to go through in order to get resolution, is it correct that they go for the HDC, the director of prosecutions and then the human rights review tribunal? It really depends. So for example with the, with sexual boundary violations associated with

[00:38:17] regulation providers, we, particularly for example, let's take doctors have been referring those complaints to the medical council, for example, because they have systems in place to manage essentially a conduct issue relating to a doctor. But we also manage unregulated providers and Vanessa will be able to speak to this. We've had a few complaints relating to unregistered councillors. We conduct those investigations and if we've determined the breach and we've determined the breach seriously enough, we refer it to the director of proceedings. The director of proceedings has an independent role to determine whether or not to bring, they can't bring

[00:39:05] disciplinary proceedings for unregulated providers, they can only go to the human rights review tribunal. The director of prosecute proceedings in this context is a officer who's been put up under the same act that the HDC is. How long would that take for a person to go through that process? Well at the moment they do tend so obviously we'd need to go through the investigation process and under the current system we would hope that we would prioritize that kind of complaint and we would look to have that closed as quickly as possible but as I mentioned before, at which time would be 18 months to 2 years, then there needs to be an independent decision made by

[00:39:53] the director of proceedings. If she was to issue proceedings before the human rights review tribunal, there are delays in that system at the moment. I can't tell you what those delays are but I understand they are considerable. And just the other version of that process that you mentioned where it's a professional that the complaint is against is a regulated profession. That's right. In that instance, does the complaint actually effectively have no time with the HDC because it's referred straight to the responsible authority? Yes, that's correct. And the responsible authority then decides if they take a prosecution.

[00:40:41] That's right. Thank you. Thank you, Mrs. Chair. I look at your annual report. One of the major or common issues for complaint is on communication. 68%. So what advice have you given to the ministry or given to the system to try to improve in this area? Communication is something we raise constantly with providers, not just through the reports that we issue, but whenever we're in a situation where we're giving education to providers as well. It features in the online provider modules that we have available to

[00:41:29] providers who can access for training in that respect. We comment on it often. There are specific issues in relation to informed consent. So for example, we have roughly 16 to 18% of complaints relate to informed consent. And effective communication is part of those rights. It's right five. You have a right to effective communication so we can comment on things such as the environment in which communication occurred, the English as a second language issues and how to interpret it for people with disabilities, need for supported decision making and having supports present. So we do regularly raise these issues.

[00:42:17] Can I just give a brief example? One example is a common issue for a long time was people not getting expected time frames for treatment from Health New Zealand. So we did work with Health New Zealand on the letters that they were sending out to patients to give indication of when they could expect changes in wait times etc. But do you see this improvement in this area? If you look back the past five years, this is the percentage of the company still pretty much the same or you see this improvement in communication in this sector? It's actually stayed relatively static and seems statistic. Something we are seeing and I actually also think you see it in a pressured system. When people are pressured for time, they may not necessarily have the time

[00:43:05] to engage as you might if you had more time. We see that in relation, for example, same day consent where because of pressures within the system, there's more often consenting processes happening at the time on the day of the procedure with consequences that sometimes the communication is not as good as one might have hoped for. But it's something we will continue to raise concerns about. Communication is also what drives complaints. So the reason people usually complain is that something went wrong in their care and in the context of that thing going wrong, they were poorly communicated with. One more primary?

[00:43:53] One more primary. Just first. Thank you very much. I'm interested to know, do you do any data comparison with other countries? How does New Zealand sit in terms of how much is our system complained about for how people feel poorly treated or whatever? Are we at the bottom of the OECD, like we are for medicines access, or where is that place that New Zealand sits on that international scale? It's a really good question. In fact, it's quite hard to do international comparison because we have quite a unique system. For example, the passage of the

[00:44:41] Code of Consumers Rights into law was a global first and in fact it's a very unique piece of legislation in the context of the New Zealand environment. Likewise we have ACC, and that is also unique, which has an impact on how the medical and legal environment works. I do have communication with the Australian commissioners, but once again it's very hard to compare data because the system is and their jurisdiction is so different. They have greater, while we manage unregulated providers, in Australia a lot of their complaints are managed through the regulatory authority APRA, which is the broader regulatory authority over registered health providers. I do engage with the Australian commissioners, but it's very hard

[00:45:29] to compare the data and to make those direct comparisons about whether we're worse or better than other systems. It's often said that the ACC system and the context of how we manage complaints is a good system comparatively to the Tejas systems which exist in other jurisdictions. Thank you. Good answers. Good question. One more. One more. You just want to quick touch on the promotion and education. Obviously I see on your annual report you also achieve over 6000 people are viewing your online, your right video. So I'm just wondering, what platform you use to promote this

[00:46:17] video and do you think only 6000 people only feel that video? Is it achieved the goal you want to do to raise the perfect awareness of their right? Thank you Dr Chung. I would love to be doing a promotion of the code, but the reality is that in the context of our backlog and our current complaints volume, we have got to focus our resources on managing those complaints. As I said before we are very reliant on our advocacy service to do that promotion and to do that education. Have had the number of contacts on that particular video being at a level which we would like? Obviously we would like more. I think it was certainly a first for HDC. I think we need to look as we

[00:47:05] move to a business as usual state. I think we need to look really carefully because we want people to understand their rights. We want people to be able to manage their complaints with the providers and we want people to access us if they are not getting the resolution that they need. So I think there is a lot more work to be done here and I think we should be looking too at more platforms to increase people's understanding of their rights. Is those patients charged from the hospital will look at the video before or would they just volunteer and look at your website and find a video? It's largely a big part of the industry I think and also as I said our advocacy service can help to promote that. You will be aware from your own, I would hope that you would be aware from

[00:47:53] your own experience as a consumer that whenever you go to your healthcare provider there is often our poster on the wall which highlights the rights that people have and the relevant collateral which tells you how to get in touch with us or our advocacy plans managed or your concerns managed. Thank you. The video was playing in weight rooms as well. You know on the screens at a lot of the hospital weight rooms and GP services that hasn't been able to be supported this year but that's another area we can look to revisit once finances allow. Thank you. Thank you very much for your time today. Thank you.

[00:48:41] Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you.
