Title: 2026 05 13 FEC
URL: https://vimeo.com/1189913057
Published: 2026-05-13
Duration: 00:26:48

[00:00:00] I'll hand over to you just for some opening comments and introductions and leaving go from there.
[00:00:04] Great. Thanks very much, Chair. I'm David McLean. I'm the chair of kiwi group capital, and this is, as you know, Steve urkwich, the CEO of kiwi bank. We're very pleased to be invited back to the select committee. We're here, in theory, to talk about the financial year ended 30, June 2025, but it does feel like quite a long time ago, and there's a lot of events happening since, and in particular, just the ripples and the waves from the situation in the Middle East flowing through to affecting and impacting New Zealand businesses and New Zealand households. And I think just reinforcing for kiwi bank, in particular, its role to helping kiwi, helping kiwi, and very important in times like this, that Kiwi bank can fulfil its purpose and help New Zealanders get through these tough times. So we look forward to your questions. Thank you very much.
[00:00:57] Thank you. Dr
[00:00:59] David Wilson, to once
[00:01:03] again, Chair, I need to make a declaration that I was a victim of financial fraud through which one of the mule accounts was with kiwi bank. So my question really is that I noticed that financial information supporting systems and controls is needs improvement. So my question is, how the controls around protecting customers from fraud and the end in the money laundering activity that passes through the bank?
[00:01:34] Steve, thank you, and thanks for your question. David, we've, I believe we've made really good progress. The needs improvement does reflect a specific convention around it's extremely difficult to get higher than a needs improvement, the amount of investment and amount of time required to get there so very focused on making improvements there. But to get to a standard where I think you wouldn't have that sort of rating will take quite a long time, we have made material steps, and we're one of the four first to launch verification so account verification, and we're at the forefront of that. Our progress on resolving fraud, we've made considerable progress from where we were probably seen across the market is one of the slow ones to respond on complaints. And we've been at the forefront of putting the new rules in for the banking code of conduct, which I'm sure you'll be familiar with, is bringing quite significant new obligations, I think, probably overdue obligations, to be fair. But new obligations around what's required from banks, there is some, some settling in period about the receiving bank, which is obviously what you've alluded to with the mule activity and wearing another hat. I'm on the banking ombudsman board, and I'm very, very conscious that the banking ombudsman is wanting to push and get clarity on that space. So hopefully we get much more satisfactory resolutions.
[00:02:59] Yeah, I think that area is still kind of unresolved in terms of the activity
[00:03:03] it is, and it's, you know, there's a there's very there's sort of, you know, as you'll be very unfortunately familiar with there's categories where we've got people that are kind of, kind of woefully blind to the situation and show a pattern, and those are far more easily identified than those in the one off situation. Quite often there is, you know, difficult social circumstances where people are, you know, this may be their last chance to try and, you know, get themselves out of a corner that's much more difficult to detect. But I certainly take the point that, you know, we need to do everything we can to strengthen that space.
[00:03:39] Supplementary,
[00:03:40] supplement, yeah, I mean just thanks general and welcome around the same topic or add on. Because obviously, yeah, one of the things in the audit report was around these controls, access management, etc. I understand that, obviously you are also doing a new technology platform. Some of that's to an open enable, open banking, etc, but I'm assuming also that would address some of the issues that were raised in the audit report. And can you tell us the progress on that? Yeah,
[00:04:09] so absolutely, at the heart of transformation is a set of capabilities that you're talking about around segregation of duties, user identity, access management is one of the biggest investments in technology to really push us to a situation where we absolutely think that we've got a global standard of it. The challenge we've had some of the systems, you know, from the from the start of kiribank, 24 years old, as you would imagine, technology that was built 24 years ago doesn't play that well with a sort of modern architecture that we've we've done. And one of the great challenges of banking transformation is you're trying to get 25 year old tech to talk to brand new stuff. And that's not always an easy marriage between those two, but certainly the cyber security and the identity access management are two of the largest components of the investment
[00:04:59] we're
[00:04:59] making. And. And we have to run fast, because the we're up against global networks of well organised criminals who are extremely innovative and getting new tools all the time. For example, the new mythos AI, you know, which is gives a next level capability for hackers. So we have to run really hard at the space, and we really committed to investing in it. Yeah, I think
[00:05:19] the vast majority of New Zealanders would be very surprised with the sophistication of cyber criminals, how diversified they are where they're operating from, marketplaces that they're operating on have customer satisfaction scores, all those things you'd expect in a very large corporate it's probably the second most profitable business in the world, behind drugs, I suspect.
[00:05:39] And the other thing I'd say is just a plea that it's important that all of New Zealand work together on this as well. So as well as us doing it individually, we want New Zealand to be seen globally as a tough nut to crack, and so we're very committed to working with groups convened by the government to ensure our National Cyber Security is up to scratch.
[00:05:57] Certainly hope that at some stage the committee might find its chance to invite the metres of the world to come in and talk about what extra activity they could undertake to protect us. I mean, I've been the and Catherine from Westpac has been the subject of a deep AI fake just in recent times, pushing an investment scheme. It's very unsettling when it's you more so for the people that might think it's legitimate and it's far too hard to get that stuff taken down by companies like meta.
[00:06:24] Thank you. We've got a new primary question from Nancy Lu,
[00:06:27] thank you Chair and welcome good to see you. In your opening remarks, you made mention of, obviously, the very unprecedented uncertainty we have around the world right now. So I want to understand from you a couple of things, including, how is performance tracking so far to date, knowing that we are talking about the financial year ended almost a year ago, but also the provision for the expected credit loss. And more broadly, just from your perspective and your communications with your with your customers, with your clients. How are they going?
[00:07:03] Yeah, sure, so I'll start with the customers first. I mean, I think New Zealanders show that they are very resilient, and keeping a roof over their head shows that they are very, very prepared to make sacrifices to do so. So our impairments and people being in a bad debt category are still going to still pretty small, to be fair, on the rise. But when you think about our borrowers, 99.6 per cent of them are up to date. So the vast majority of New Zealanders are navigating what it does have a very clear knock on mp PAC too, and I think you can see it, regardless of where your constituents are, that discretionary spending is off very significantly. And the economic headwinds of fuel are probably the most direct tax that I've seen in my career. I think the its ability to really hamper discretionary spend and make it really difficult for companies that don't have you know, the ability to pass on those charges, I think you know are doing it tough. We haven't seen any significant Fallout, but I think it's fair to say that, you know, people's numbers will be down really materially, which usually takes a little while to play through. We are making as many calls as we can. We always encourage people to speak to us as early as they can, because that gives us our best chance to try and help them. But for instance, we haven't had a mortgagee sale. And so, you know, most customers are navigating really difficult times in terms of provisions. We've got $128 million provided for as at the last quarterly Reserve Bank, which is the last public numbers, that's 92 million of its collective so we are going to, I'm sure, I'm sort of getting ahead of myself a little bit, but I'd be very confident we'll follow the other big three banks who just announced by adding on more collective provision. We have talked about at our Executive Risk Committee, the need to go to a more pessimistic economic scenario. So we run three scenarios. And you know, I guess a status quo, a slightly pessimistic and a more pessimistic. The difference between the middle one and the bottom one is about another $9 million in overlay. And I would expect that that would be going to the end of the year, and would be coming through. So we'll be making more provisions. Having said that, at 128 million, I think that we are well provided for and got, you know, good capital buffers for tough times,
[00:09:24] good. Thank you.
[00:09:25] Dr. Deborah Russell,
[00:09:27] I was going to ask a primary along the same lines, because you did talk about how you are supporting your customers. I guess we are sitting now in the fuel crisis, which is driven out of the Middle East, and few years back, we had the covid crisis, and a few years before that, we had the global financial crisis. So similar sorts of shocks and difficulties, are you able to draw on that past experience in order to work out what you do now?
[00:09:58] Yeah, you are. I mean, it's a great point you make. Particularly the playbook from the covid period and now around early identification of people that are suffering stress. So where we've seen people eating into savings quicker than they have traditionally done over the last period, whether they you know, whether it be more frequent calls to our contact centre, those sorts of things. And a much stronger, for lack of a better description, much stronger rhythm about a reach out programme, so going to customers proactively, I would say that's probably one of the number one features, where we built a much stronger capability to use all of our team to do that outbound calling, whereas pre covid, that would have been limited to the mana people we had in the contact centre. Now we've got, you know, up to 1000 frontline staff that can be making those care calls. Offer much stronger technology base with a much stronger way to record, you know, where they're at. So I'd say that's the number one way. I think the second way is, and all three of those crisis is that patience has been rewarded, that, you know, cycles are bad, that they're hard going, but they don't last forever. And so taking and staying open for business, I think, is critical, but also recognising that people will turn a corner. Who knows when? But that's the job of a bank is to just be a bit resilient and patient in these situations.
[00:11:15] I know it's hard to I completely agree. I've I know if you can sit tight, it helps at this stage. You know, there's degrees of uncertainty in this. Are you finding it possible to model possible outcomes in this scenario that you weren't in covid Or the other way around? Or is it just sort of too different to be able to sort of,
[00:11:39] I think it's almost too early as well,
[00:11:40] right? Sure.
[00:11:41] But that's active work will be going on, just going on at the moment, modelling that with the economics team, the credit team, modelling different scenarios, as Steve said, plugging them in and saying, What Is that likely to mean for people? Yeah.
[00:11:54] And there's also a not, you know, I mean, the Ferris requirements are very particular about how you do that, but there is also has to be room for an overlay, which is about that uncertainty that you that you talk to, yeah, which is actually the unknowns, you know. So if you'd asked us a month ago, how long was this going to last, I'm sure half a room might have seen in the next few weeks today. I'm not sure any of us would be as bold as that. So making sure that the models can tell you a lot, but they can't tell you everything.
[00:12:21] Yeah, we're what we're three months into this. Now. Are we three
[00:12:24] months into the two week war? I
[00:12:26] was trying to remember back to covid where, yeah, we
[00:12:29] had a little bit
[00:12:30] more advanced warning that it was coming, because it started to affect overseas before it got to us. But then it was so uncertain for quite a long time as just how it was going
[00:12:39] to develop. We have also had an eye on the global financial crisis, although only the older ones and us can remember that in particular, the implications for that if global financial markets were to be materially affected and shut down, and in the early stages of this Iran crisis, there were bumps in the availability of funding from global wholesale markets. So that pay books been dusted off. It doesn't look like it's an issue at the moment, but that's quite relevant for banks where part of your funding comes from. Global financial markets.
[00:13:09] Yeah. I mean, it's a great point that David made. I should have made that point, which is our number one priority from our board, has been liquidity and make sure that we're in a situation that we don't you know, GFC markets did lock up. We raised 600 million Swiss dollars in really recent times. But there was probably a one or two days during that fortnight that you wouldn't want to been going to the market. Sure, yep. And it's, it's to David's point, it isn't not available. It's just a lot more expensive than you would want. And, you know, once you've got that on board, you've got it for six years, so you've got to balance liquidity and you know, sustainable returns.
[00:13:44] So from I'm drawing, possibly drawing a little bit too much out of what you said, so be my last comment. I just, I get the feeling that this crisis, then, from your point of view, is maybe a little more similar to the global financial crisis than it was to covert, but they are, nevertheless, crises from which you can learn lessons. Yeah,
[00:14:00] I think
[00:14:01] that's right.
[00:14:02] I was gonna say the GFC, perhaps more in the macro ending markets and covid, perhaps in the early stages anyway, on the impact on individual businesses, right? Covid then sort of turned the other way around, where people stayed at home shopping, and things sort of changed quite quickly. So, yeah,
[00:14:19] okay, thank you. Thanks,
[00:14:20] David, your supplementary
[00:14:22] Yes, it is to Deborah's point and runs down the same lines, really. So have you seen us how we're now looking forward and taking account of our own crisis? Have you seen substantive changes in terms of residential versus commercial lending?
[00:14:40] Well, both are very quiet. I would say, in the business space, customers just don't have the confidence to make commitment about capital equipment and and making big shifts. You know, we've got a number of customers who were ready to go, you know, either committing to, say, a large lease or committing to a new cap. Project that have just put that on the back burner. So that's sort of different to the other committee question, which was around, you know, are you seeing problems? I think people are holding on to the cash they've got. So the in the same way as liquidity is king for us, liquidity is key for customers, residential particularly, not so much first home buyer, that's still pretty it's still pretty strong. But what we have seen in our commercial property space is anyone buying off the plans has just walked away. So there's no activity of people wanting to buy off the plans at the moment, because they're just not sure what those property is going to be worth by the time they're constructed. Construction costs, you know, look, look vulnerable to the, you know, the crisis that we're in at the moment. So just a much slower all those things have a knock on. So you know, if you're collecting waste from a building site, that building sites not happening anymore. So we're seeing that second and third order knock ons for businesses, not just the construction businesses, but those that support them, the subcontractors, everyone, everyone's a lot quieter
[00:15:59] and good luck.
[00:16:00] Thanks, Mr. Chair and thanks Steve and David and to your team for coming today, the Year in Review coincided with the banking inquiry, no doubt be aware of and familiar with. And I think actually, there's very few things that we all agree on, but we all want Kiwi bank actually to do well and to become a sizable competitor in the market. I guess my question to you is, most of the debate around that pathway to being a competitor for Kiribati revolves around capital structure. So you know, raising money from the market, capital injection from your shareholder, or other such mechanisms. My question to you is, in the absence of the capital structure question, what are the other pathways that exist for kiwi bank to realistically move to a large player in the market?
[00:16:54] Yeah, I think, well, first of all, I'd welcome the fact that everyone agrees that we want Kiwi bank to succeed. And I particularly thank Dr Deborah and Francisco for wearing the Kiwi bank black and green today. But no, this is this is very important. The banks need to grow and be successful. We need Kiwi bank to have a bigger impact in the market. Has to be a bigger share in the market when it's seven and a half percent or something, market share, the big banks can afford to sort of let ignore it. If it was 15% it would be very hard to ignore we could have much more effective market to do that. You need two things. You need capability and you need ongoing sources of capital. Capability is going to be addressed by two things. The people in the technology, people already Kiwi bank because of its brand positioning and the fact that it's seen as a bit of a challenger and disruptor. Ki we bank now has a really attractive employment propositions, hiring the best people in the market, which is good the technology transformation project, which is replacing the core it will give it a capability that is a generation ahead of the big banks. So as we get through that, further through that, we'll have that capability. But you also, if you're growing, you need ongoing sources of capital, so bank and banks need to plan this out for sort of several years. You don't want to be running short and having to come to the market. And at the moment, thanks to the Reserve Banks, changes announced late last year, the effect of those capital changes by the Reserve Bank effectively gave Kiwi bank about 500 more million more capital headroom, which translates to something like 20 billion of mortgage lending, if you did it all in mortgage lending. And so that has made a huge difference to our outlook. So for the next two or three years, we, you know, we or more, depending on how fast the economy grows and how fast we grow within it. We're okay from the capital point of view, but we always need to be planning and looking ahead and saying, in three to five years time, we're going to need more. So we need to be working well ahead of time to plan for that.
[00:18:55] That's positive in terms of the sizable difference from those capital requirement changes. Are you able to give us a sense of what, what were the biggest what made the biggest difference from that, RB, Ng, capital review. Was it the just the ratios, the capital ratio. Was it the risk weights? Was it, you know, was it everything? What? What was,
[00:19:18] yeah, combo, really. I mean, in the near term, the risk weighted asset, levelling the playing or nearly levelling the playing field after more than two decades of being disadvantaged compared to the big players, was very welcome. I think the second part that you touched on was the step up. So as we were planning capital planning with the step ups, that obviously meant that we had to be really careful about what the capital planning was having those moderated meant that two levers were really, really strengthened the position. And of course, as David touched on, it was the equivalent of $500 million being injected. But of course, we didn't have to go and raise it, and didn't have to pay for it. So there's a there's a benefit from that as well,
[00:19:58] which is thank you. And
[00:19:59] I think, reflect. The fact that for a long time, it didn't make any sense that we were carrying 60 more percent more capital for a loan compared to
[00:20:08] ANZ, great news. Thank
[00:20:09] you. Just a supplementary on that. So that gives you that, effectively, the equivalent of a capital injection just given you more runway. But does that also give the other banks more ability to lend as well, and sort of neutralise your position,
[00:20:21] not really because they're in the same position that they're in before, because their internal models had given them the advantage. So it gives it, you know, chops the advantage of someone like a NZ, from being, you know, 50% ahead of us to being 10% ahead the tier two element. Well, a combination, really, it's just the amount of capital that you're holding for the assets that you have as the was the key feature of that, the risk weighted asset element of it, that's the big change. So, you know, that does that gives you a chance to be more competitive. But the things that David touched on around our own capability and scale, as called up by the Commerce Commission report in this last couple of days, as well, as you know, we just need to keep growing. We need to be bigger and more influential. You know, the time I've been here, I'm sure we have certainly had more influence, and we talked about more in other boardrooms than we were. But when we double the size in another five years, we'll be talked about even more. So, you know, we've it's always been the mission to be bigger, to challenge harder and and even if we don't win the customer, if you get a better deal, than we've achieved what we were founded for, which is to make you better off,
[00:21:23] just in terms of your broader remit around open banking. I know you're a bit of a two weeks away, hesitate two weeks away to use the word lagar, but I think when you were here last time you said you'll actually have the ability to leap
[00:21:37] frog. Yeah, we will. So we're launching. The team will be pleased that I'm committing to it publicly. But at the 29th of May, we'll be out with open banking. The product that we come out with open banking will be the third generation, so we'll be the first to that generation of open banking. It'll also mean we'll be far faster to open banking for business banking as well. And the technology we've chosen, which is homegrown and successfully done in Australia is a far more flexible solution for fintechs joining us than it is for the Australian players. And you know, this was to be fair, we were later, but it was an agreed and programmed later date, rather than we asked for a delay. But I think we're in strong suit. I also think, you know, if you if you do want an example of where a smaller player can make a shift. Our announcement that we wouldn't charge for data feeds got a response from four others who joined us after we announced.
[00:22:30] So
[00:22:30] up until that announcement, they were going to charge you for your data to be fed into open banking, our stance to never charge you for your own data did influence others, I believe. And so it's an example where you know, the technology be easier. We know as the smallest player, we've got a partner better. And so if we can bring, you know, other capabilities into the market, just like we do with advisors, we should do that, and and customers will choose. So I'm sure they'll choose some great FinTech solutions, and we'll be the plumbing, and customers will enjoy that, just like you've got multiple apps on your phone.
[00:22:59] Steve, can you give us for the, you know, the hundreds of viewers that'll be tuned you give us a layman's version of an example that you'll be rolling out in terms of open banking. What does it mean to you?
[00:23:11] Yeah, so, I mean, if you, if you think about collecting your information for a home loan, for instance, so you think, Geez, maybe I can get a better deal for my home loan. But, you know, one of the things you worry about is, I don't really have the time to get all my information together, and then I've got to go and collect it and go and find my broker. Open bank will be a classic example where you'll be able to permission the bank to provide all that information directly to a broker. At the moment, we do that for our own customers, but we'll be able to do it for others now, so that broker will have the very latest financial information, you know, in real time with 100% certainty that information hasn't been manipulated. That means a faster time to use. So for many, many, 70% of New Zealanders who go to a home loan advisor, that will mean a far easier and cleaner experience. I think the classic example is it won't be long before you see air Wallops. And you know, wise and others doing international payments via open banking and so, you know, lower cost to remit money overseas via open banking solutions. I think all of those are clear examples where fintechs can provide a solution that should make banking more competitive.
[00:24:13] Thanks. We've got a supplementary from Dr David,
[00:24:15] yeah, and I'm not sure it's your issue to solve, but we've had discussions with various Pacific Island communities around remnants. You see where I'm going, you know, some of those payment rails are just not really available to them. No, can you make comment on that for us?
[00:24:31] Yeah, I can. I mean, it's, it's certainly extraordinarily uncomfortable space to see people working so hard to, you know, support their far now on the islands, and regardless of where they're going overseas, to being charged so much, I don't think banks have done a good job. It's been, you know, it's a classic example where the current banking systems are pretty opaque and quite difficult, and, you know, there's fees on each end. And so that has opened up, you know, quite a significant market for remittance process. Is who I think Pro on, prey on a lack of sometimes visibility, sometimes sophistication, sometimes the absolute need to get the money to a place and banks intended to walk away from it because of the AML risk. I think it's an area where that's really right for fintechs and other technology players to do a much better job at a lower cost. Certainly hope that's the case.
[00:25:23] Yeah. So, I mean, if we're talking, say wise providing that access into the into some are currently can't, because you can't get
[00:25:34] a bank
[00:25:35] account. Yeah. I mean, I think what you'll probably see, you'll probably see companies like global players, like air wallets, be able to provide that capability. And so I think they've got, I did look at it the other day. I think they had 140 payment entry points. So, you know, going to like MP so like a prepaid account in Africa, a grab account in Indonesia, those sorts of things. So the traditional bank account, I think Dr David will be different. And I think if you can get the money to where it needs to be spent from, like a grab account in the Philippines or in Malaysia, then you're actually giving yourself a decent chance to do a much better, lower cost deal than needing a traditional landing place where, you know, for instance, some banks and big global banks have pulled out of operating in those territories.
[00:26:24] That's very advanced. Thank you. Thank you, Steve.
[00:26:27] That seems to be the end of our question. Thank you, David and Steve. It's great to have you both here and to see the progress.
[00:26:34] Thanks
[00:26:35] very
[00:26:35] much, baking. And we look forward to 29th of May, yes, day after Budget Day.
[00:26:41] Thanks very much. Thank
[00:26:42] you. Thank you.
[00:26:47] Yeah.
