[00:00:00] Aotearoa, kaitiakitanga, mana whenua. Thank you. you

[00:01:02] and Michael Kilkalli joining us. Karen, we have 10 minutes with you this morning.

[00:01:57] That includes time for questions. Pass it over to you now. Thank you, Maurena Koutou. We're both members of the National Employment Law Committee of the New Zealand Law Society, Te Kahui Ture o Aotearoa. I'm a barrister in Wellington. I've got over 30 years' experience in employment law, which covers two holidays acts and two decades in large law firms. And Michael is an associate with Meredith Connell in Auckland and prior to that he was a judge's clerk in the Employment Court in Auckland. The approach taken by the New Zealand Law Society when commenting on proposed legislation is a neutral one in terms of policy. So we're seeking to provide you with feedback on the workability of the legislation, identifying potential issues and drafting.

[00:02:43] And as law is our natural view, our natural review mechanism is to think about how we might explain it to our clients. Our written submission makes a number of comments that are directed to the predictability and certainty of the proposed legislation, but we'll focus only on three of those points today and then leave a few minutes for questions from you. So I'll start with a standard hours point that we make in our submission. The bill is premised on standard hours being specified in an employment agreement, roster or notional roster. And that's the baseline or foundation for annual leave, public holidays, bereavement leave, sick leave, domestic violence leave, et cetera. So it's really important as a concept in this draft legislation.

[00:03:28] So just to start with a practical issue, at the moment, standard hours isn't required in employment agreements. The employment relations that brings in more flexibility than that and it refers to a requirement to include an indication of the arrangements relating to the times the employer is to work. So you see some quite flexible and fluid clauses at the moment in employment agreements. So there's going to be some transition needed if we go with a standard hours notion from what currently is quite flexible and where many employment agreements won't have standard or set hours specified. And it's not quite clear how that transition is going to be addressed. This leads to the second issue about standard hours, which is the bill requires that but doesn't provide a fallback mechanism if the hours aren't specified in any of those ways.

[00:04:21] So where the employer and employee simply don't agree and they stick with their current employment agreement, what happens then? The third issue is whether the standard hours truly reflect what the employee works. And I listened earlier this morning to some of the industry submissions which have explained the implication of that for how the time off part of leave is calculated. For the Law Society, our concern is two-fold. First is that the standard hours might not reflect the current reality. But second, the shall we say less honourable employers might deliberately set low standard hours knowing that the employees will happily, voluntarily work additional hours in order to boost their pay to that point. But that means they don't have annual leave and the other actual time off entitlements that accrue at the rate that they're actually working.

[00:05:13] The second point I'm going to touch on is what we colloquially know as time and a half for payment on public holidays. If I can be frank, the clause relating to that one, two, four, it's quite long. It has cross references in itself and references between some clauses that are quite difficult to follow. It's one of those clauses that you read and you wonder how you might actually explain that to anybody in terms of how it's meant to work. So it is complicated. The second point about it is that there are two mechanisms for the time and a half. So there's one for time and that's what the employer is required to pay the employee for each hour worked. And then the half has a different calculation and that's greater of 50% of the employee's ordinary hourly rate and any identifiable amount.

[00:06:06] So you're doing one calculation for the time and then another one for the half and by no means a payroll expert, but I think that's going to complicate things as people try to put this in practice. So those calculation parts might not be the same, which risks the calculations being very complex to do. So I'll hand over to Michael now to talk about our final point, which is the remediation issue. Thank you, Karen, and good morning everyone. So I'm just going to speak to you briefly about the proposed remediation process for outstanding liabilities under the Holidays Act and those provisions are at Clause 156 in Schedule 3 of the bill. It's proposed that that process will have retrospective effect and could be used to remediate underpayments and payment failures,

[00:06:57] which for whatever reason have occurred up to four years prior to the bill receiving the Royal Ascent. We're concerned that the material relating to the bill does not discuss whether the retrospective provisions are appropriate. There does not seem to be any consideration of whether retrospectivity can adversely impact either employers or employees, for example by reducing or extinguishing some employee's statutory entitlements. Second, whether the extent of the retrospectivity is appropriate or if it requires adjustment. And third, whether this process could upset or lead to relitigation of settled matters. We also have concerns as to whether it is appropriate to prescribe the substantive content of those retrospective provisions through regulations,

[00:07:48] rather than through primary legislation, because regulations would not be subject to the same level of public and parliamentary scrutiny. Those concerns are heightened as the bill does not require the Minister to undertake public consultation on the draft regulations in circumstances where statutory entitlements are impacted. Finally, we have concerns about regulations that would specify a minimum amount payable, a term that is in that undefined category that I just spoke about, would be defined through the regulations, because the regulations would not be subject to the same level of parliamentary and public scrutiny. This would mean an employer would not be required to make a remediation payment to an employee whose entitlement is below this threshold.

[00:08:37] It raises fairness concerns as the threshold could bar an employee from receiving a payment. They are otherwise entitled to receive, no matter how small the amount. Those concerns are heightened because we do not know at what level that threshold will be set or how it will be calculated. A similar concern arises around the concept of reasonable compensation, given that also appears to contemplate something less than their existing statutory entitlements. We advise you to seek advice on those matters and to consider whether amendments are necessary to address those concerns. I'll hand over four questions if there's any time. Thank you very much. We do have a short amount of time, but we do have one question.

[00:09:22] That doesn't appear we have any. We have a question from Jan Taniti. Thank you Madam Chair, and thank you very much for your submission. It kind of backs up in many respects what some of the industry bodies have been saying as you said. One thing I want to get there, you talked about if there is not-so-savory employers as such and what they might do in this situation. Put it in simple terms, and I'm trying to get my head around this too. Does that mean that they could be incentivising part-time and casualisation workers in this particular case? Because it could mean that they're paying out less in the annual leave? To answer that vaguely, yes, possibly.

[00:10:10] But also you could have full-time employees who are put on say 35 or 30 hours a week. I mean it may be that you're thinking of that as part-time, which is probably right. But work greater hours than that. So they might say work-have the standard hours of 30 or 35 in their agreement, but work much more than that on a regular basis. I think there is a possibility of some, and I'm hesitating to use this word, but some abuse of the system, particularly by unscrupulous employers who are trying to limit how much time off people actually have, particularly if they have to bring in replacement employees at a higher cost.

[00:10:55] Great, thank you. Thank you for that. And a question from Lauren Tsunan. Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a very quick question regarding the standard hours as well. Do you have any data or would this be an understanding of the current average hours that employees actually worked a week? And potentially is it greater than the standard hours that we're seeing now? The reason I ask this question is, you know, we hear anecdotally, but I want to check if there's any data to say that people are working longer and longer hours that are unseen or unaccounted for in their contract. That's not data that the law society would hold, so the answer to your question is no, we don't have that data.

[00:11:41] It might be held by the Victoria University Employment Relations Centre. They do an annual analysis of collective agreements and what provisions are in those. So the data may be somewhere, but it's not held by us, I'm afraid. Thank you. We might look into that. Thank you so much. All right. Thank you very much. We appreciate your participation in the process. You're very constructive and helpful as a mission. So thank you again. Thank you. On now to have a similar theme, Simpson-Greason. We have Rachel Judge and Mike Mercer joining us. Rachel and Mike, we have 10 minutes with you this morning, and that includes time for questions.

[00:12:27] Thank you. I am Rachel Judge, a partner at Simpson-Greason, and I'm presenting with my colleague, Mike Mercer, Senior Associate. We have both been heavily involved in advising on the current Holidays Act and assisting clients through their remediation processes. And we thank you for the opportunity to present our oral submission today on behalf of Simpson-Greason. The submission has been informed by feedback from a number of our clients and also in line with what Karen's just spoken to, our own observations as lawyers as to where complexities may arise based on the wording of the current bill. At the outset, I do want to note that Simpson-Greason supports the core objectives of the bill.

[00:13:15] We have been actively advocating for many of these changes for a number of years, in particular the move to an hours-based accrual model and the simplification of leave payment calculations. That said, there are some aspects of the bill that are likely to pose some compliance issues for employers and particularly those with complex workforces. So we do consider that there is room for the bill to potentially include some options to address some of those issues. And we wish to comment on three key issues from our written submissions where we have made recommendations. Those are the notional roster, the mandatory standard hours versus additional hours leave compensation payment approach,

[00:14:05] which we'll refer to as LCP, and the issue of strike action during the transitional period. So just turning to the notional roster framework to start with, this applies to determined leave entitlements where an employee's standard hours or days of work cannot be readily identified. And while the policy intent is understood, we submit that the framework as drafted may not be workable in practice for many employers. Clause 9, for example, requires that a notional roster is agreed in writing and kept up to date in workplaces where hours are variable or changed frequently, that will be difficult if not impossible to apply.

[00:14:52] The combination of a requirement for agreement and then continual updating risks, continuous negotiation, creating significant administrative burden and also employee relations issues flowing from all of that. For large employers and particularly those with unionized workforces, this is unlikely to be practicable. There is also a level of uncertainty in the role a notional roster is intended to play, although it's described as notional. The provisions do require it to reflect actual working patterns to a certain extent and to be revised as those patterns change. So this risks blurring the distinction between a genuine notional construct and an operational roster and, in our view,

[00:15:42] risks undermining the purpose of introducing a simplified mechanism in the first place. We recognize that there is provision at clauses 10 and 11 for a Labour Inspector to determine a notional roster where agreement cannot be reached, but we consider that reliance on Labour Inspector determinations as the sole fallback is likely to result in increased disputes, delay and litigation. So on this point we submit that the framework would be materially improved by introducing an express alternative mechanism where clause 9 could be amended to provide that where it is not reasonably practicable for an employer and employee to agree a notional roster,

[00:16:29] that agreement is not required as a precondition to determining those standard hours for leave purposes and in line with that that clause 10 is amended to allow an employer without Labour Inspector intervention to determine a notional roster by applying some form of agreed averaging method and we're hearing from our clients that if some form of rolling average were applied such as the 13 week average that that's something that could be workable for them going forward. I'll now hand over to Mike Mercer to discuss the further two points we wanted to raise. Thank you, Rachel. Further, the two points I want to speak to, the first relates to the lead compensation approach and like our learner friends from the New Zealand Law Society,

[00:17:23] we addressed the mechanism for additional hours being paid by the lead compensation payment. While we understand this is intended to provide certainty and to avoid the accumulation of large leave liabilities, there are two circumstances where hours of work will fluctuate and it could create some outcomes for an employer that are not consistent with the bill and operational difficulties. In particular, the structure of the lead compensation payment will create incentive for employees to favour being paid in a cash loading rather than accruing leave and the resist agreement to standard hours. What we're hearing from clients who are really concerned about their ability to agree with standard hours with their employees is that given the attractiveness of lead compensation payment,

[00:18:09] you could end up in a situation that is different from what has been discussed previously with actually employees all time including who would prefer to end up on low standard hours with large additional hours that would provide the disincentive to them taking sick leave when needed and significantly receive their reduced pay when they do so. The bill doesn't currently allow for alternative approaches that may reduce the same or better outcome for employees. In practice, we are hearing from clients who have a strong preference to accrue leave on all hours work including additional hours while others may prefer the pay-as-you-go model of the lead compensation payment. Either approach would be broadly neutral and effective for employees that have a get-leave paid at the time or the ability to take it later.

[00:18:58] In our view, there is scope to deliver on the intent of the bill for allowing greater flexibility in how lead entitlements are delivered without jeopardising employee protections or entitlements. We therefore recommend that clauses 129 and 132 of the bill be amended to allow employers as an alternative to paying lead compensation on additional hours to accrue leave on all hours work in addition including those additional hours at their election. The second point we wish to raise relates to strike action during the transitional period. It is inevitable that there will be areas of disagreement during the transition process given the new lead framework will require significant changes to existing employment agreements, payroll systems and operational practices.

[00:19:45] We are concerned that without clear limits, disputes arising solely from the application of the transitional provisions may become the subject of strike action or lockouts. There is precedent that unions and employees cannot participate in unlawful industrial action even when it otherwise relates to bargaining if the issue in dispute arises from a legislatively defined process by way of example. The Fair Pay Agreements Act in 2022 which has since been repealed included expressed restrictions on industrial action in relation to fair pay bargaining. We therefore recommend that the bill be amended to provide that disputes arising solely from the application or operation of the transitional provisions cannot be subject to industrial action during the transitional period.

[00:20:35] This could be achieved by adopting a similar approach to that in the All My Fair Pay Agreement Act and in this context disagreements about the conversion, reconciliation or technical application of the transition rules should be treated as procedural matters and resolved from interpretation, guidance or dispute resolves and mechanisms via the employment institutions rather than industrial action. Thank you Madam Chair and members of the select committee. We are prepared to take any questions at this time. We have one minute and I doesn't appear that we do and can I just say it's not a reflection of the lack of interest. I have to make that very clear. You always put forward incredibly comprehensive and helpful submission and I thank you for that. And I know that our officials would thank you for that too.

[00:21:21] Thank you. Very good. Thank you. So we'll move on now to our next submitter. Thank you. Thank you. We have Madfly Limited Trading. We have Sherilyn Walther. Hopefully I'm pronouncing your surname correctly. Enterprise and Staffing Innovations New Zealand if that makes more sense to you. Apologies. Having a few technical issues there. I hope you can have me. That's okay. Easy. You've got to have me. Right. Sorry. Apology. Sorry. Let's just get that right. I haven't seen your logo. Sorry. It is actually a trading name of Madfly Limited. So thank you Madam Chairman and members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear today and speak to EZNZ's written submission on the Employment Leave Bill.

[00:22:12] My name is Sherilyn Walther and I'm the Managing Director appearing on behalf of Enterprise and Staffing Innovations NZ. My name is Sherilyn Walther, otherwise known as EZNZ. By way of background, EZNZ provides practical employment relations and HR support to businesses across New Zealand. A big part of our work is helping clients with the operational employment issues that come up every day in real workplaces. Things like leave, payroll, payroll interpretation, rostering process and documentation. These are matters that can look quite straightforward on paper but if they're handled incorrectly, they can very quickly turn into disputes. The condition of our clients is small to medium sized businesses. For those businesses, getting employment processes wrong is not just frustrating. It's expensive, distracting and disruptive. Most do not have in-house legal teams or large HR functions, if at all.

[00:23:01] They're trying to do the right thing but they need the law to be clear and they need it to be workable. When disputes do arise, even a claim with little or no merit can still cost up to $10,000 to defend and costs alone before you factor in management time stress and disruption to the business. So from our perspective, clarity and employment legislation really matters. If the law is too technical, too uncertain or too hard to apply in day-to-day operations, the consequences are very real. With that in mind, our overall position on this is that we support the direction of reform but we say the bill still needs refinement. We support the objective behind the bill. The current leave framework is too complicated. It's been difficult for employers to understand and difficult for payroll systems to properly apply.

[00:23:46] And it's led to too many errors and too much uncertainty so reform is needed. We support the intention of creating a simpler and clearer leave system. But our key message today is that simplification should not come at the cost of fairness, operational workability or new compliance risks. In our view, the bill makes some very positive changes but there are still several areas where it needs tightening so it does not simply replace one set of problems with another. So there are parts of the bill that we clearly support. We support prorated sick leave occurring from the first day of employment. That's easier to understand and it better reflects service over time. We support annual leave occurring from day one. That's much easier to explain than the current distinction between a crude leave and annual leave becoming available only after 12 months. And we support clearer rules around public holidays and otherwise working days.

[00:24:34] But the clarity in the area should reduce uncertainty and reduce the risk of underpayment issues. So this is not a submission opposing reform, quite the opposite. We support reform. We just want to make sure the reform is genuinely workable in practice. Our biggest concern is the 12.5% leave compensation payment for hours above minimum contracted hours. This is probably our most significant concern. We're concerned about the proposal to require a leave compensation payment of at least 12.5% for additional hours and casual hours. That may appear simple at a high level but in practice it creates real problems for businesses where workers have genuine ongoing employment and regular patterns of work but may work more than they guaranteed minimum hours. This is a very common arrangement especially in small to medium businesses.

[00:25:21] In many cases businesses will guarantee for example 30 hours a week but regularly offer more. The reason for that is practical. In sectors such as agriculture and construction the amount of work available is often heavily dependent on weather conditions and changing operational demands. Businesses are trying to provide employees with a reliable minimum while still retaining the flexibility to offer more hours when conditions allow. So a person may be contracted for 30 hours but often work 40 when the weather is favorable and work can proceed. This is like construction that could actually be even more so you might work more hours in the summer than you do in the winter. That does not make them casual in the ordinary sense. Our concern is that if every hour above guaranteed minimum automatically attracts a 12.5% leave payment that creates a number of problems.

[00:26:10] So it creates more payroll complexity, not less. It increases labour cost immediately. It may reduce the employee's ability to build up meaningful paid leave over time and it may encourage a system where leave is effectively cashed out as work happens instead of being preserved as time away from work. From our perspective that's not just a payroll issue, it's also a well-being issue. So our recommendation is that the bill should draw a clearer distinction between genuine casual work and ordinary additional hours worked in ongoing employment. Where there is a real ongoing employment there should be a pathway for leave to recruit rather than requiring automatic pay as you go treatment. So the bill also needs to be clearer and more practical treatment of casual employment.

[00:26:55] Closely linked to the 12.5% leave compensation payment is the question of casual work. One of the real issues for employers is knowing when a worker who starts out as a casual has in reality become regular. That matters because it affects payroll treatment, leave treatment, legal risks and fairness. If the bill is going to rely on a separate model for casual employees then it needs to be much clearer about when someone is genuinely casual and when they're no longer casual. Otherwise we're just creating a new uncertainty in place of an old one. So our recommendation is that the bill include either a clearer statutory test or a review point so that where work becomes regular and predictable the employee moves into the ordinary accrual work-frame or framework. The bill should also avoid creating unfairness between casual and permanent workers.

[00:27:45] We're also concerned about parity on this one. If a casual worker receives 12.5% upfront but a permanent worker accrues leave that only becomes valuable when it's actually taken then there's a real possibility of inequitable outcomes between different categories of workers. We're not suggesting casual workers should be disadvantaged, that's not our point. Our point is that simplification should still produce fair outcomes across the workforce. The committee should test carefully whether the structure of the bill creates unintended imbalance between workers who may be doing similar work but under different employment arrangements. So next we have KiwiSaver and Commission need to be expressly clarified. We also think the bill should be clearer on some points around the remuneration issues. The first is KiwiSaver.

[00:28:31] The treatment of KiwiSaver in relation to leave compensation payments should be set out clearly in the legislation. If it's not employers and payroll providers will take different approaches and that inconsistency will create exactly the kind of confusion this reform is trying to fix. The second is commission and nondiscretionary incentive payments. A simpler leave model should not result in regular commission income being left out of leave calculations where that income is a normal part of the employee's earnings. If that happens, employees in commission based or incentive based roles may end up worse off when taking leave and that creates a real disincentive to take and leave at all. That would be an unfair outcome and would undermine the broader purpose of leave entitlements.

[00:29:16] So we say the bill should expressly preserve the inclusion of regular nondiscretionary payment and similar payments or provide a mechanism that properly captures them. The variable hour work is still not fully resolved especially around day based leave and notional rosters. Our final point is that the bill does not yet fully resolve the practical issues that arise for workers with variable hours and variable days. We remain concerned about day based leave, particularly bereavement leave and family violence leave. Where people do not work the same pattern each week there can be uncertainty about what counts as a day, how part days should be treated and how leaves should apply across changing rosters. We're also concerned about notional rosters. At the moment the bill does not seem to give enough practical certainty about when a notional roster is required, what information is needed to create one and when it should be reviewed.

[00:30:08] Without that clarity there's a real risk of more inconsistency, more confusion and ultimately more disputes. At the very least we think that the legislation or supporting regulations should include clearer guidance and practical worked examples before the bill comes into force. So in closing our message is a straightforward one. We support the goal of this bill. We support day one accrual for sick leave and annual leave. And we support clearer public holiday rules. But we ask the committee to refine the bill so it does not simplify shift complexity from one part of the system to another. Sorry it does not simply shift complexity, sorry. In particular we ask the committee to look carefully at the 12.5% leave compensation rule, the treatment of casual work, fairness between casual and permanent workers,

[00:30:54] key we save a treatment, commission and incentive payments and the practical operation of day based leave and notional rosters. If these areas are improved we think the bill will be stronger, fairer and much more workable in the real world. Thank you for your time and I'm happy to answer questions if you've got time. Thank you very much Sherilyn. We do believe and I think we've run out of time with you we have unfortunately. But thank you so much for being part of this process and I've got to say a really good submission, really helpful. And I assume and assure you sorry that the officials will be pleased too. Thank you very much. Now to essential HR, Mike Johnson, who I believe is online.

[00:31:48] Mike, there we are wonderful. Okay man I went. Yes. That was a quick submission. There we go Mike. 10 minutes for you includes time for questions and we'll hand it over to you now. Then I go to a good morning. I'm Mike Johnson from essential HR. And I want to thank you for giving me an opportunity to speak to you all. Madam Chairman and members of the committee. I'd like to start by saying how impressed I am with the draft legislation. He's had a horrible starting place being the Holidays Act and so many things to to address and it does. From my point of view really I really sense some positive development moving ahead from the Holidays Act.

[00:32:35] And a very clear attempt to address a wide range of issues things like casual staff and the pro-ratering of sick leave from day one, dealing with on call and stuff like that. Yeah, raise my hat to you all. And especially as you now try and process everything that's coming at you in this consultation. Now I speak on behalf of SMEs. I have some 400 or 500 whom I provided HR advice to. And I've been pleased that I can already go back to them and confirm for many of them that their concerns will be addressed in the new legislation. And there'll always be some of course that are not. There is one though in particular, and it's the first and significant issue that I referred to in my written submission that I want to address today.

[00:33:22] And I strongly suggest you consider the particular recommendation that I'm going to make. And the reality is that this is all about enabling small businesses to comply with the legislation. So I want you to start by picturing an SME, maybe a small retail outlet, a cafe, a restaurant, a roofing contractor. There are any number of them whose workload is dependent on the weather or on a daily varying level of customer demand. We all know them and these businesses can thrive, but that's especially where staff are working as a team. They dig deep sometimes. They leave early where that benefits the business.

[00:34:07] They'll work a Saturday to help make up time. And for these and many others, compliance with the holidays act was just a nightmare. There was no way a business owner could understand what was needed to comply. So they relied on their payroll provider to do things right. But we all know that at some stage, all payroll systems were non-compliant with the holidays act. And yet it was the SME who bore the brunt and the cost of a labor inspector's audit and its resulting penalties. And it just didn't seem right. For example, how many payroll systems that you know do you think would cope easily with a roster that has somebody working Wednesday, seven hours, Thursday, 10, Friday, 10, Saturday, 14 and a half, Sunday, two, with sleepovers in between each of them, then three days rest and then going through the whole thing again.

[00:35:04] It was a roster that effectively is an eight-day revolving roster, but payroll systems just couldn't cope with it. It was almost not possible to comply with the legislation. We need something similar, something simple, rather not similar, something simple to manage what have become some of the most complex of rosters. And while this bill has gone so far, it can easily go a step further in removing complexity. It's a real challenge when it comes to drafting legislation, I know. And I just pulled out section one, two, three of the bill, section two, subsection two, where the employee's leave payment must not be less than the rate of leave payment for each relevant hour that the employee takes as a period of leave,

[00:35:57] or that he does not work on a public holiday that would otherwise be a working day, et cetera, et cetera. For most business owners, if you present them with that, it's not that it's wrong, it's not, it's correct. But it's just that it leaves them saying, the business owners are never going to get their heads around it. For the SMEs that I had you picturing before, there's no simple standard hours. And the many additional hours may or may not be linked to an availability clause, because for many of them it's actually just part of their commitment to their jobs. So we need a simpler way to collect dollars for leave payments broadly, and for ease of understanding and to avoid having to rely on the payroll provider for compliance.

[00:36:51] So please, can we have just a few very simple rules built into this legislation? The first one, for every dollar that you earn, you put aside or that somebody earns, you put aside another 12.5 cents for leave, 8.5 probably for annual leave, 4 for sick leave. For every hour worked, you accrue the 0.0769 hours plus 0.0385 hours. For every uncertain otherwise working day, we use the 13 weeks. It is great. You've got some very simple stuff already built into the draft legislation. Take it that step further that all earnings get treated the same way. You don't separate out standard hours from other hours.

[00:37:38] That everything that relates to hours worked or protection of employment or employment status, leave that with the Employment Relations Act. We don't need to muddy the waters within the Employment Leave Act. And leave it so that payroll providers are doing just that. They're providing a payroll service. I really urge you to press on. Don't allow the tightness of the timeframe to stop you from making that extra change and making it that little bit more simple that employers will be able to comply. Are there any questions? Thank you, Mike. Don't appear to have any questions. Oh, we have one from Pam Jay.

[00:38:24] Thank you so much. When you started your submission, Mike, you sounded like you're fully supportive of this legislation. And then of course you want this legislation to go a bit further than when I read your first line in your submission, it says you're neither supporting nor opposing this bill. So why so undecided? Okay. Thank you for pointing that out. I tend to start most of my submissions in that sort of way. I mean, on the whole, yes, I'm very supportive of what you're changing. I'd far rather see this go through than not go through. I would love to see, though, that one step more, make it even simpler, make it even easier for small business owners to comply. Can I just say, Mike, thank you just to acknowledge the things that we've heard again and again today that are workable and then the things that you think can be improved and how constructive you've been with that.

[00:39:18] So it's really helpful for our officials and moving forward as well. So thanks for your time. Thanks for your participation. We'll now move on to our next letter. Thank you, Mike. Good luck. Thank you. We now have Paul McKay from Business New Zealand. Joining us on Zoom.

[00:40:04] Paul, can I just check that you're online? There we are. Wonderful. Yes. Welcome, Paul. We have 10 minutes with you for Business New Zealand, and that includes time for questions. And sorry, I hadn't acknowledged you. We have you, John, as well. Ah, John, are you with Business New Zealand or EMA? I'm with the EMA, but we're one of the core members of Business New Zealand, and so I'm just listening in on Paul's submission. No worries. Paul will be likewise here. You'll join us. We're together. Okay. Yes. Hence your submissions are one after the other. Right. Paul, over to you. You've got 10 minutes, and that includes time for questions. Thank you. Thank you very much. And I welcome this opportunity to talk to the submission.

[00:40:50] I'm Paul McKay. I'm the Manager of Employment Relations Policy at Business New Zealand. And I have a history with the Holidays Act going back to 2003. This is our most recent week of every review since. We're very pleased to see this bill. It contains essentially the elements that we have always asked for, which is a simplified approach, an ausbestax cruel approach. And so, therefore, our submission is designed in support of the bill. But to highlight two or three things, which we think like a number of the previous submitters have said would be benefits from a simplification. And also to point out some of the issues that might arise if we can't get that kind of simplification. Some of the issues have already been covered, so I won't deal with them in detail,

[00:41:35] but I will come back to them. But I'd like to spend a little bit of time first on the remediation process. As it's written in the bill, there is a process in the bill that doesn't have the criteria that would allow a decision to be made. And the process doesn't come into effect until the rest of the bill comes into effect in two years' time, effectively. Whereas the regulations that would give the ammunition, if you like, for the process will be able to be developed as soon as the bill is passed. That, to us, seems to be an opportunity missed. The remediation process, after all, is about the history. It's about the current act and the pitfalls that have been found in terms of how hard it is to make payments.

[00:42:27] And the history of the last few years has been full of many thousands of hours, many thousands, many hundreds of thousands of dollars of cost in terms of remediating and getting agreement to processes. What we would rather see, perhaps, is rather than have a schedule come into effect in two years' time and regulations that can be developed at any time from the native ascent, is to put it all together and say, why don't we have the process and the criteria able to be developed together and as soon as they're available, they can be used. That would be the first element of our suggestion. But the second is, as it stands in the bill, the process effectively allows the employer to choose to use the process and without the permission of the employers who would be affected by it.

[00:43:13] That has some potential ramifications, particularly in relation to the Wages Protection Act, because it seems to us that an employee whose pay has not been correctly determined under the current act is, as it is now, currently entitled to have that put right. And yet the remediation process, as we heard from an earlier submitter, may contain elements that have an averaging or a near enough, good enough answer to it, which may in fact leave that employee short of what they would otherwise get if they were properly remediated under the current act. So we think, and there's no mention of the Wages Protection Act in relation to this, so there's a potential point to be checked, and it's up to officials to have a look at that,

[00:44:01] but we would rather see a process that was developed together in its entirety so that proper consultation could be undertaken over the development of that process and through the regulatory process. And also that the use of it is one that has the employers engaged with it as well so that they can see that what they're being offered is fair, and the whole process becomes together as one rather than being in two parts. So that's remediation as far as we're concerned. We think that would benefit. We've also got the issue of, as a number of submitters have made on the leave compensation payment, but first in relation to rosters, as it stands the bill effectively has a roster that can contain both standard hours and agreed additional hours.

[00:44:48] With the issues that have been raised around the cost of additional hours and the leave compensation attached to them, we think there's sense, and most from a payroll point of view, and also a cost and common sense point of view, that a roster is a roster. So anything in a roster would be standard hours, and anything outside a roster would be additional hours. That, I think, goes a long way to addressing some of the concerns that the law society and others raised where the cost of additional hours inside a roster, especially where the rosters are variable, can have quite unforeseen circumstances or consequences for businesses, certainly additional costs, and particularly in relation to small businesses, as we heard with the previous submitter, the variability of costs is one of the things that they confront every day,

[00:45:34] simplifying it so that any given roster is known to have a particular cost attached to it would be of a benefit. There are a number of other points in our submission which are written down, so they can be taken as read, I think they're relatively self-explanatory, so I'd rather leave as much time as possible for questions of that's okay with you. That is wonderful, Paul, and appreciated by our committee. We've got a question first from Jan Tinedy. Thank you, Paul. Lovely to see you. Can I also acknowledge the work that you've done in the Holidays Act over the years and it's been very much appreciated across governments and very much put into use I can see in this bill and how it's been written. But I want to go back to that question, and you might have heard my question before

[00:46:19] when I asked the Law Society, you talk about rosters and using the rosters. One of the reasons why we voted against this bill at the first reading is that we feel that there are people, as it's written at the moment, who would be missing out on their leave allocations. With your, and the way that this bill is written at the moment, would the way that you have written this suggest with the rosters and work that's sitting on roster, would that solve that issue, do you think? It would go a long way towards it, and I think it's actually of a benefit to both employees and employers. First of all, if you add anything in a roster being the so-called agreed additional hours and standard hours, should attract leave accrual, but not necessarily the extra payment.

[00:47:04] So there's a benefit to the employee and they would get, they would crew leave on all of the hours they worked inside their roster and the benefit to the employer is they're not paying extra costs simply because a portion of that roster is so-called additional hours. So I think there's a good way to balancing out that issue. I don't claim to, and I'm certainly not a payroll expert, I don't claim that it would solve all problems, but we think it would go quite a way towards it. No, and I totally get that, but could you explain to me what, so I'm just trying to think of a scenario where you would work outside of a roster. Have you got a scenario where you'd be work, there would be work outside of the roster? There's quite often situations, I'll use a manufacturing example because I've had that kind of experience where people have a standard roster

[00:47:52] that their shift roster if you like, but then there are times when, for instance, the mill is shut down for maintenance and that roster is still working, but then there's a whole lot of other extra work to be done for maintenance so that people agree that they will add another four or five hours to their normal roster shift pattern to accommodate that extra work and that would become their pattern for that period of time and then normally revert back to their normal operational roster. So the way that the bill is cast is that all of those additional hours would attract more money, but they wouldn't attract any more leave, whereas the post, so there's a double whammy for both employee and employer in having just the payment for the extra hours

[00:48:39] and no leave for the employee. It's quite common to have rosters shift around in terms of their variability. Most rosters, I have to say, most rosters are pretty standard. You've got your standard 80-hour roster or your standard 12-hour roster, but overall there can be many, many occasions when they vary for very good reason, but they're done in a structured way and not the kind of can-you-work-over-time-tomorrow-night kind of way, but in the kind of we've got a big order coming in, we want to put a whole lot of extra shift in or extra hours-on-shifts for the next period while we get this big order out. That's not an uncommon situation. And we have a question now from Pam Sheikpama. Thank you so much, Paul, for your submission. So this is about your support in principle for LCP.

[00:49:24] We have had some submitters this morning who think that it is not a good idea because it actually undermines the core purpose of paid leave. So that paid leave time is time that people should be spending with their family doing other things. So what would you say to those who think that LCP is not a good idea? I've lost you there. I'm not saying again. Oh, sorry. Are you there, Paul? It's closer. Closer, I think. Right, John, did you want to be able to answer that question? To be honest, Paul probably got more technical expertise on that, so I'm happy to start with a bit of

[00:50:09] talking about the EMA submission and Paul, as you were saying. Oh, Paul's there. No, that's all right. We do have one more question after this. If you could answer that quickly, we'll move on to the next question. That'd be great. Thank you, Paul. So I missed that piece. I dropped out and came back again. No, we know. So because you support LCP in principle, and we have had some submitters who support LCP, they say that it actually undermines the whole purpose of paid leave because paid leave is about people having their own time time with their family. So what would you say? LCP is useful in the sense that it deals with the costs of, particularly in the casual work side of things, but having it attached to additional hours inside

[00:50:55] what you might call standard hours or rosters creates a cost. It is also problematic when it comes to sick leave because additional hours are not normally part of something a person would get sick leave for. So we have some concerns. We've detailed that in our submission in relation to the quantum of the leave compensation payment, but the principle of it we are very supportive of. We have a question from Vanessa Weening. Thank you very much, Paul. In one of the earliest submissions, there was a statement around the fact that Business New Zealand, CTU and MB had been working on this for a while and sort of an implication that what has come out of this process wasn't quite what was expected.

[00:51:40] How do you react to that? Things have moved from time. We had the review in 2018, which was a consensus-based document with recommendations that resulted in a shadow or an exposure draft, which we had significant issues with it and made things much more complicated. The move to an hours-based accrual approach is the single biggest factor we think which is going to make an improvement in everything. And so we've seen, we've seen an evolution of this. So it wasn't what we expected in the first place because that's not what we agreed in 2018, but we've evolved to a point where we're particularly comfortable with the overall direction of this. Marvellous. Thank you. Great. All right. So let's move on now to you again

[00:52:26] as the EMA Employment Manufacturers Association. So Paul, we have you and I believe John as Alan is unable to join us. So we'll let John start with that. Okay. Wonderful. Thank you. So as an introduction, I'm John Fraser McKenzie. I'm the Chief Executive of the EMA and I would like to add in my former career, I worked as both the CFO, CEO and business owner of businesses with 2,000 employees, 1,000 employees, and as the owner of a business with five employees. So I have been a victim of the current legislation and a number of different guys as before. So the EMAs are where the largest business association New Zealand,

[00:53:11] we believe we represent about 20% of the country's workforce across both very large significant businesses like foodstuffs and conterra down to very small businesses. We're a national association. We're focused on the heartland, the commercial heartland of New Zealand and we've been around for 140 years. So in terms of the current discussion, we did our first submission on the current act over eight years ago. So we've been very involved with it as Paul and business New Zealand. So I'd just like to talk to our process about testing and getting some input from members. So we've tested the substance of the bill with more than 600 members

[00:53:56] across a highly interactive series of road shows in both in Torunga, Hamilton, Whangarei and Auckland. And the people who attended those road shows were payroll and HR specialists and they really tore apart the fabric of the proposals and applied it to their workplaces. So we had a very interactive process with them and we fed that feedback back to MB and so various points are reflected in the draft bill. So we've had a very thorough interrogation of what's in there. We also had the opportunity to run it past approximately 2,000 of our members at our regular briefing series, which we run across 16 different venues and that's through the Upper North Island

[00:54:43] that took place at the end of last year. And we've also had some detailed workshops with select members which range from complex workplaces, supports, distribution centres, retail and healthcare and they're also part of some workshops and confidential focus groups with MB. So we've had an extensive engagement with a multitude of businesses and that's what's informed our submission. We also have internally our own experts in employment law, collector bargaining and employment relations and to pull apart the legislation. So collectively our internal experts have over 80 years of experience in the field and again that's been informative for our submission.

[00:55:29] We all agree that the legislation is a vast improvement on the current one. That would be a big step forward for business. We strongly support the new bill and we would like to be given some time to test it and to improve itself and to make necessary amendments as time goes by. We do need some stability to see how the new legislation plays out but we do think it's both simpler for employers and employees and so are very supportive. And as I mentioned before, we do support the changes reflected by business NZ and in our submission and as Paul is more of a technical expert than I am,

[00:56:15] I think he is on hand to help answer any of your questions on the EMA submission with which Paul is very familiar. Thank you. Wonderful. Do we have any questions from the committee? It appears not and as I've said earlier in the day, not a reflection of a lack of interest. You've had a very comprehensive couple of submissions that have been really helpful for us and for our officials. Thank you for your involvement and your contribution for acknowledging you and your involvement over time as well to get it to where we are. Thank you Paul. Thank you. Great. Thank you. We'll move on now to NYIB. Have in the room. Welcome.

[00:57:01] We have Courtney and Louise and Abbi with us. We have 10 minutes with you. That includes time for questions and it's over to you now. Thank you. Thank you to the committee members for hearing from us today. My name is Courtney Sloan and I'm head of Government Relations for NYIB across Australia and New Zealand. I'm joined by my colleagues and Louise Hoffman, who is head of Corporate Affairs for New Zealand and Louise Dahmer, who is our Solutions Manager of Consulting Solutions at NYIB. She can answer any technical questions you have about our product today. NYIB has been a leading provider of payroll and business management software for local small and mid-sized businesses for over 30 years.

[00:57:46] We see firsthand how various legislative settings translate into real-world outcomes for our customers and their employees. Our submission and our comments today reflect our views as a technology provider and centre on the clarity both we and our customers need to adhere to the law. Across New Zealand, smaller mid-sized businesses rely on software like ours to interpret and apply the law correctly and when the rules are complex, the risk of error increases. For many years, employers and employees have faced complexity and uncertainty in how leave entitlements are calculated and applied. In our view, this bill represents a positive step towards a more transparent, consistent and workable system. In particular, the move to an hours-based accrual model significantly simplifies

[00:58:32] calculations, improves clarity for employees and employers, and reduces the likelihood of unintentional non-compliance. It is a practical reform that better aligns with our modern workplaces of working today. At the same time, the scale of change required to implement these reforms would not be underestimated. Delivering compliant payroll systems involves product development, extensive testing, customer education and transition support. This is a multi-phase process that requires careful sequencing across government, software providers, payroll professionals, unions and employees. While we welcome the proposed transition period, we encourage the committee to carefully consider how that transition is structured.

[00:59:18] Careful staging within the two-year transition period with clear milestones and an allowance for pilot programs will be critical to reducing any implementation risk in ensuring all parties are ready. Our submission outlines several recommendations we believe would strengthen the bill and support a successful transition for businesses and workers alike. We welcome your questions today. Wonderful. We have a question from Grant McAllen. Thank you. Earlier, one of the earlier submitters made the comment that legislation was being designed by more to make it easy for payroll companies to deliver the product rather than to make it fairer for the workers. That was a quote from an earlier submitter.

[01:00:04] Any comments, please? I think for us, we simply seek clarity and when there's clarity in the legislation employees are more likely to receive the entitlements that they're entitled to and employers are more able to understand their obligations. Software is an important part of that because employing businesses rely on software to ensure that they're paying their workers entitlements correctly. So, I wouldn't necessarily agree with the assertion that this has been designed with software in mind. However, I would say that having clarity of rules makes it easier for software to help its customers adhere to the law and get workers what they're entitled to. Thank you. Do you have a question from Tiana?

[01:00:50] That transition period and you said that will take structure and their milestones and stuff like that. Do you have any specific ideas around what you would need to what kind of barriers you might see in the way in terms of trying to iron it all out? Will the two years be enough for the two years? We believe two years is sufficient just. We require 18 months to build the product and then a minimum of 6 months to make sure that our customers are educated and that the resources are available for them to learn about the new system and what their obligations are. In terms of sequencing within that two years our argument is really about

[01:01:36] pointing out that if everyone waits until the end of that two-year period to have all their systems ready and in place we risk being misaligned. An example of that is without the necessary guidance from MBIE software cannot build the product and code in the rules that the law requires of us and if the product is not ready then the customers and employee businesses don't know how to use that new software. Breaking that two-year period up into milestones where MBIE guidance provided in say the first few months software is ready by 18 months 6 months transition period for educating customers. Did you have anything to add? Not in particular but definitely the education piece for employees

[01:02:22] and employers would be relatively huge especially things like converting understanding how to convert their existing lead balances into the new rules and so we would want to be working through a test and learn process for almost all of that two-year period to work with customers and understand how best to implement that across our customer base. Great, I have a question from Jan Teneity. Thank you. I want to go to your submission that you talk about subpart A in the lead compensation payment and about the clarity that you as a payroll provider would require. Can you talk me through what the difficulties would be for you as a provider now as it's drafted what are the difficulties that would be

[01:03:08] for you that this LCP would create? Yeah, I think what we need to really consider when we're dealing with these types of calculations is that when we move to national rosters, standard hours, overtime considerations etc we need to be really clear in rostering systems and time and attendance systems how employees rosters are broken down taking into consideration for example in a rostered day what portion of that day is part of their standard hours therefore a pro-annual leave or what portion is an LCP so we really need some clarity to be sure that we're building up their rostering systems in particular and understanding and interpreting those hours worked and whether or not things like an ongoing regular roster

[01:03:54] that is planned and approved by the employees every two weeks then becomes a notional roster for the purposes of a pro-annual leave or whether a notional roster or standard hours are in place but an employee may be rostered for a longer period of time due to any other reactive factors that a business may have so economic factors, you know peak holiday seasons for retail for example all those types of things so when we get to a variable employee base it's very important that we're clear on what constitutes standard hours, notional rosters and the LCP hours as well So the way that this is drafted at the moment is there the possibility that this would create greater complexity in this part? I would probably need to look at that

[01:04:42] a little more detail but I think the main thing for a software provider is understanding that clarity around what constitutes a notional roster for those variable workers how often can that be updated all of those types of things so that we can ensure that when rostering systems are in place is it looking at the actual rosters, notional rosters so it's really just about being clear on the rules there That's helpful, thank you Just following on from a comment earlier the problems with the current act there's been a whole lot of issues and there was a general interpretation challenge for the payroll companies as a whole and lead to a whole lot of back paying legal issues and so forth Are you confident that this new

[01:05:28] replacement act is going to be able to alleviate those concerns you'd be able to deliver a product that's accurate Do you want to have a little one? Yeah, look I think certainly the simplicity and clarity that's in the current that we're seeing comes from in the current draft bill and from talking with payroll specialists like Abby and the rest of the team we have back at NYOB it is certainly more workable and ultimately that is where we would like to see the bill get to is that it is workable in the system there is that room for judgement and interpretation is removed because that has of course contributed to a lot of those issues and that essentially that it's easily applicable for employers and employees as well so they can get those entitlements And just further to that

[01:06:14] I'm a McCallum apologies, the guidance that we received from MBI early in the process would be critical for getting that clarity of interpretation They didn't quite get it right themselves last time It's a very complex piece of legislation that's for sure Thank you so much for your contribution to the process I do appreciate you being here in person it's refreshing, we're spending a lot of time on screens and so yeah thank you again for being here and we'll move on now Our next matter who is online Guy Van Radis we have from Rossmate Guy, hopefully we have you online

[01:07:08] Hello, hello Welcome, we have 10 minutes with you this morning that includes time for questions and we'll leave it to you to manage your time accordingly and it's over to you now Great, thank you My name is Guy I'm one of the co-founders of Rossmate which is one of New Zealand's leading workforce management platforms We work with businesses across the country in almost every industry from small family-owned cafes to larger corporations helping them automate employee scheduling, time-tracking and importantly today leave management So leave compliance for us

[01:07:54] is not just an abstract policy problem, it is something we build, test and work with every single day I'm here today because this bill will ultimately be implemented into software systems like Rossmate and I want to offer my ideas as to how we can go about making sure that this bill works in practice and not just in the law The old system was broken It left key terms like reasonable undefined and that forced software vendors and employers to make judgment calls which inevitably led to inconsistency across New Zealand

[01:08:40] So it is encouraging to see that this bill is introducing clearer and more structured rules such as the otherwise working day test But I believe that there's an opportunity right now to go even further and close the gap between legislation and real-world implementation And so today I would like to offer two of my ideas First, an AI-powered legislative search tool This would allow anyone to describe a real workplace situation in plain English and be taken directly to the relevant parts

[01:09:26] of the bill with those sections clearly highlighted Importantly, this would not be a chat box It would provide advice or it would not provide advice or conclusions Its role would be purely navigational Helping users find the right parts of the legislation quickly and accurately for whatever scenario they have just described Because I think even with the clearer rules translating the legislation into real-world scenarios especially for businesses with variable rosters or non-standard patterns will remain challenging However, where this would

[01:10:14] become extremely powerful is in the data it generates Every query could be logged anonymized and aggregated to build a real-time picture of where the legislation is causing confusion where edge cases are emerging and where further clarification may be needed Instead of waiting years for compliance failures or remediation claims to reveal these issues this creates a continuous feedback loop allowing the legislation to evolve over time and ambiguity to be progressively reduced My second proposal is a government published conformance test suite for payroll and workforce management software

[01:11:00] and this is where I feel most strongly about because it addresses a critical part of the problem that is being overlooked The majority of businesses in New Zealand do not manage leave manually they rely on software to do it for them and when a business adopts one of those systems they reasonably assume that it is compliant in New Zealand law but in practice that assumption is not always correct Many of the systems used in New Zealand are built for global markets where New Zealand is treated as an afterthought and as a result compliance issues can be baked into the software itself meaning businesses can be doing nothing wrong without be doing the wrong thing

[01:11:46] without realizing it simply because they trust the systems they're using So that is why I believe MBIE should publish a comprehensive conformance test suite for leave management softwares This would consist of a set of canonical test scenarios each with clearly defined inputs and exact expected outputs These scenarios would go well beyond the simple examples and instead cover a full range of real-world complexity Software providers would be able to run these scenarios against their systems and verify that their calculations produce the correct results and if they cannot

[01:12:32] their system would not be compliant Over time I think that this could form the basis of a formal certification process where software used in New Zealand must pass the conformance suite in order to be marked as compliant because if we can get this right it has a powerful effect because when the software is correct a vast majority of New Zealand businesses will be compliant as well It is critical that software providers are able to translate this legislation into code correctly and that we are all interpreting it the same way I think a comprehensive test suite covering real-world scenarios is exactly what makes this consistency

[01:13:18] possible So New Zealand has an opportunity to do something genuinely world-class here not just pass clear legislation but build the infrastructure that ensures the legislation actually works in practice consistently across every business that relies on software to manage their people and so I urge this community to think more broadly about how we can ensure this legislation works in the real world by investing in the systems and frameworks that make it easy to understand consistently applied and reliably built into the software used by businesses every day

[01:14:04] Thank you Guy We have time for a couple of quick questions We have a question from Vanessa Wienek Thank you Guy The AI sort of almost sounds like the agent that you described for looking up legislation and describing how it would fit in with certain scenarios Are you suggesting that that should be provided centrally rather than somebody creating their own agent to interrogate the legislation? I think that should be a part of the website where everyone can publicly go view the bill so that people who or business owners who are not relying on software would be able to go in and describe their situation and

[01:14:50] find the correct relevant information on the bill automatically but I think the real powerful thing about that is what I described as you get those queries you get to understand where people are becoming confused and that really helps in the future amendments to this bill So what you mean is that it should be paid for publicly rather than somebody having their own AI license and agent that they build themselves Question from Tiano Tuyono Thank you very much for your presentation Earlier you were saying that that these global software companies sometimes are not aware

[01:15:36] or have not developed their software with the very specific conditions that we have here in New Zealand and that could cause issues Do you have some specific examples of those issues? I don't want to name names because obviously it's a bad look for businesses but many of our clients come off global systems onto our system and are surprised when we have different rules about how otherwise working days are currently defined and the difference between the old system to the way our system works which is compliant with New Zealand law, the old bill and so because

[01:16:24] I see that difference all the time I know that a lot of global competitors are not compliant Thank you and we actually do have time to have a very, very quick question from Jan Thiti Thank you and I just really want to make certain that I've had experience in the past having lived through a novopee and that still creates issues for me. Are you saying that these flashbacks Flashbacks Wait for your flashback Wait for your flashback Are you saying with the consideration given now, if we consider this now that we could alleviate any possibility of something like that

[01:17:10] happening in the future Are you talking about the conformance test suite? Yeah So I think it would become I think this 24 month period or time frame if you could build out a suite that would allow us to essentially make sure and test that every scenario is covered and the software is working automatically it will make a large majority of the businesses in New Zealand compliant automatically because they're using software and it will kind of wean out the software systems that are not compliant in New Zealand and then you could essentially say to business owners hey, these are the compliant

[01:17:56] software if you're using these uncompliant software just so you know you're being uncompliant I think the issue is that business owners are assuming that their software is compliant with the New Zealand law and in a lot of cases it is not Thank you very much Guy I really appreciate your scenario thinking in this process it's really helpful for us Thank you We'll move on now to Vusa, we have Aidan and Lewis in the room welcome come up to the table we've got 10 minutes with you and we'll hand it over to you now Thank you very much to the chair and members of this committee

[01:18:42] and we thank the select committee for allowing us the opportunity to present on the Employment Lead Bill we are representing Te Aka Taueta Victoria University of Wellington Students Association as Vusa we represent all Taueta from our University half of over 20,000 students the vast majority of which are part-time workers and will be affected by the proposed bill my name is Lewis Collins I am the Campaigns Officer for Vusa and I'm also joined here by Aidan Donahue the President of Vusa so Vusa opposes this bill in its current form fundamentally because it shifts the risk from employers on to workers particularly with those with insecure and low-hour jobs student workers will feel these changes

[01:19:28] sharply and early we know that students are already dealing with high rent food costs, transport costs and a difficult labour market more often than not our student food bank is empty by the end of the week so many of our Taueta rely on part-time and casual work simply to stay enrolled and keep going when lead protections are weakened the impact is immediate there is less income there is less security less ability to recover when sick and more pressure to choose work over well-being we understand the need for clarity and reform in this space but we do not believe that this should come with a deduction and leave entitlements so our main concerns student workers who take more time off

[01:20:14] due to illness and burnout will lose income between us alone we have a combined experience of nearly a decade in hospitality students already worked when they were sick because hours were hard to come by we are only two examples but we echo the wider experience of our students this bill will create an incentive for students to keep working and not take their required sick leave the COVID pandemic showed us the importance of staying home and recovering but staying home will become more and more irrational for students this will also have consequences for businesses particularly small businesses that already have a safe base staffing pressures and limited capacity to absorb absences when workers are unable to take proper leave or feel pressured to work while unwell

[01:21:00] illness can spread through workplaces and deepen existing shortages one of our students has told us they are already stretched by university demands alongside paid work and they are regularly called in to cover extra shifts and have been left managing an entire reception area alone because the rest of the team was sick so situations like this are not sustainable for workers or employers this is just one example of many so burnout higher staff turnover reduced service quality and greater training costs for businesses already operating on tight margins won't be good for anyone and this is not sustainable another point is that our students are leaving the country in record numbers many of our graduates are leaving New Zealand because good working opportunities simply do not exist

[01:21:46] students will compare New Zealand wages and conditions with countries like Australia and the United Kingdom so weaker early career conditions will accelerate this graduate flow according to Treasury Secretary Ian Rennie he stated that an estimated 20-40% of New Zealand graduates were migrating overseas so a significant share of our qualified young people are leaving during their prime working and earning years taking their skills, tax contributions innovation and future leadership in the long-term consequences of this will include a reduced skilled workforce, weaker productivity growth and greater pressure on key sectors already facing shortages and this will mean fewer graduates investing in the future of Aotearoa New Zealand so we can see the value in being able to go

[01:22:32] home early and take specific hours of sick leave to cover the remainder of a shift however we strongly recommend parity of leave entitlements with full-time work and for alternative holidays to be accrued on a full-day basis we also want to emphasise the need of a strong definition of standard hours in the bill, we're deeply concerned that this can take the form on following agreed minimum hours rather than the usual or average hours worked in a week minimising leave entitlements for workers with flexible rostering and finally we want to see protection against breaches to the spirit of the law especially the proposed changes to entitlements to holiday pay the requirement that 50% or more of the same day of the week as the public holiday had been worked in the preceding 13 weeks are this threshold as far too easy to circumvent

[01:23:18] and workplaces that have flexible hours or days of work such as in retail or hospitality again we understand the need for clarity for employers however this threshold will have the effect of incentivising unneeded roster rotation to avoid the increased liability of holiday entitlements the Employment Lead Bill will make it harder for workers to rest recover and stay financially afloat students do not need more precarity dressed up as efficiency and ultimately this will impact our disadvantaged students the most, our Māori students our Pacifica students and our disabled toera women make up the majority of our university and they too will also be impacted so we urge that either this bill does not go ahead or amendments

[01:24:04] are made to this bill that target administrative simplicity, protect low-out workers and preserve genuine access to leave mā kū te rau rau, no te rau rau ka ora ai te iwi with my food basket and your food basket that people will thrive forever. A fair labour market should allow students to work and study and not force them to choose between the two. Nā mihi nui ki ā koutou. Thank you very much we have a question from Jan Taneti first. Thank you thank you Lewis and thanks Aidan for coming in. Really good submission thank you because we've heard from other sectors and I want to ask a question about the standard hours and we've heard from other sectors where that's an impact on them. Can you talk through what

[01:24:50] the majority of students' work would look like in a way. Is it that they have a small number of hours and then flexible hours on top of that that you talked about one person what does that look like for the majority would you think? The majority of students what we see is they'll have an agreed set of minimum hours that they will be guaranteed to receive in a week so we're looking at fast food places say McDonald's is the usual current contract format however what that really means in practice is say you might have six hours agreed minimum but throughout the majority of the time you'd be working up to 10 to 20 just wherever you're rusted we're concerned as we mentioned that if we just go by the agreed minimum hours that that's considered your standard hours we just want to make sure that it reflects fairly what you actually are doing

[01:25:36] per week. So this could have as it's written at the moment this could have a a huge impact on annual leave in title months for students if it's only based on what your agreed minimum hours is if you're only getting a cruel leave from your minimum but you are actually working so much more than that it would be unfair and you'd be losing out on a fair bit of leave. Thank you and a question from Tiana to Eonal. Thank you very much and thank you for your very strong submission and I agree with what you're saying as well just to follow up around your comments that you made around clarity and simplicity we did have a couple of software people show up as well and I was wondering around that clarity and

[01:26:22] simplicity part what would your suggestion be to this committee to ensure that we do get that clarity but we still are able to retain the leave entitlements that you've been talking about. Well it comes to the idea of universalism where if the leave entitlements are the same across the board that's less of an explanation between that you have to make to either young workers or new workers and employers as to what each different contracted different type of agreement is worth and we personally do a lot of work within our students to identify what entitlements they have already by putting in different entitlements depending on your work leave that only opens up the risk of misunderstanding or

[01:27:08] abuse from employers relying on not knowing what your entitlements are. Wonderful thank you very much really appreciate you being here to be part of this process with us and as I've said to those that have come and joined us in the room it's nice to be part of this. Thank you very much for coming on down. Thank you very much. With that we move on now to the midwifery employee representation advisory services who are online we have David Munro. Welcome David.

[01:27:54] Thank you for joining us. We have 10 minutes with you this morning that includes time for questions. We'll hand it over to you now. Thank you to the committee for the opportunity to submit. You've got our written submission I realised in preparing for this I think I'll probably start at the bottom and go back to the top. We're going to start with the questions and then we'll go to the bottom and go back to the top. I noted at the end that the small number of things about the spill that we support could easily be enacted as part of an amendment to the holidays act and having listened to a lot of the submissions today I think that could be a much simpler way to tackle what have been identified as the problems.

[01:28:40] We do however start with a congratulation I haven't actually heard it mentioned today but the attending is going to the unintended consequence in the current legislation whereby women in particular come back from parental leave to leave that they may be able to take but which has no value is along due improvement and it should have been done as an amendment to the Holidays Act. I should mention that Mary Asses Midwives Union 99% of our members are women and mothers and it's a standard piece of advice that we under the current legislation give to people is use up your annual leave before you go on parental leave

[01:29:26] because it may not have any value to you when you come back which is completely counterintuitive to the fact that when you come back from parental leave you may indeed then want to have some paid leave for rest and recreation which has been pointed out in a number of the submissions but also just to attend to all the new burdens of parenthood. So a piece of good news there most of our members were 0.6 or 0.8 and varies so where we may not be having to give advice about taking your annual leave I can see that the transition period which later on we've suggested should be three years

[01:30:12] but the education sector gets 10 health is pretty complicated too and how that all shakes down would be something that would take time other submitters have talked about promoting the casualization frankly permanent part-time work is a real feature of a lot of work in the health sector and the fact that those rosters move around I've been interested in the comments about the additional hours that would create the leave compensation payment versus the permanent ones the incentives are difficult to completely assess at this stage because we know from a number of our members

[01:30:58] that some of them want more permanent shifts and currently do casual shifts and there would be a drive to get that so that you're accumulating leave on those for others the preference is that to be genuinely casual you ring up, no, don't have to come and the leave compensation payment would be an improvement on the current 8% the otherwise working day and I've been working with the Holidays Act for many years including for unions and as a consultant and trying to work that out has already been the subject of a huge amount of work, Bournemouth was referring to it as well

[01:31:44] I think the 7 out of 13 is too onerous in health sector there are a number of formulas written into collective agreements 5 out of 13 is not uncommon when I worked as a consultant in the fast food industry we had a collective agreement where 2 out of 3 wound up being the proportion that was deemed to be fair so we proposed that it should be 4 out of 13 in the previous 13 weeks and the other thing about that too was up averse incentives because people will think I need to get up to the 5

[01:32:30] in the 13 weeks and you don't really want people making decisions about taking an extra shift when it may not be in their interests or the interests of the employer simply to meet a threshold which is more onerous than the one that generally applies in health at the moment made comment about the transition arrangements bereavement leave I'm not sure that it's not an opportunity to actually target some of the things that are insufficient of leave in the current act in collective agreements and in the health sector in particular the leave available when the circle of life goes wrong when it can be a partner or a child who dies

[01:33:16] is often more than the 3 days and it would be a strange situation where that happens to somebody and they only take 3 days and in terms of the other submitters I've always been a hawk about the fact that I I detest the practice of employers who just automatically say do you want to take some annual leave and you've run out of sick leave do you want to take some annual leave because I very much support the views that annual leave is for rest and recreation and if you're on bereavement leave it's not rest and recreation if you're on sick leave it's not rest and recreation and that's a very strong argument I think for improved bereavement leave we've got collective agreements where it includes pet parents we've suggested here spouse partner

[01:34:02] because as I say that there's an extra layer of trauma and tragedy in that situation because we can all expect to go to our grandparents funeral we don't expect to go to our children's funerals we we didn't comment about the the sick leave accumulation and the impact that will have on a lot of our members and we would further submit about an underpinning mechanisms. I heard earlier the theoretical example of the person who can take 10 Mondays off and frankly that works union members as well you're a full time worker you can only take 2 weeks off with your 10 day sick leave you've got a colleague who's chosen to only work one day they get 10

[01:34:48] but having mentioned that we predominantly 0.6, 0.8 membership that some sort of underpinning in there of at least 24 hours applying regardless of how few the hours might be should be something to consider but that's probably all I want to say the bottle is in the submission and we support the CTO submission in terms of the problems and I've made a comment there there is a lot of drafting work that needs to be done there are parts that you read and you sort of struggle to identify the meaning but I presume in all good pieces of legislation we're at the beginning of the process and the improvements will flow but the final point I think

[01:35:34] is that it would be a hell of a lot easier to just do the necessary amendments to the current legislation. Thank you very much David we do appreciate your participation in the process and your submission that you've given us today. Thank you. Any questions? Yeah there is always time for questions there's not always questions but Keanu we do have a question from Keanu. Thank you very much for your comprehensive submission we heard earlier from the software people that said they could sort this all out in two years but you're suggesting three years could you explain to the committee why you think we should have that extra year in terms of potential transitional arrangements?

[01:36:20] Yeah it's partly in the health sector and I don't know if this has been mentioned before and it is another interesting consideration about the holidays legislation because although it's there for rest and recreation it's not necessarily always easy to take and there are huge leave balances I caught the tail end of Steve Haring's submission earlier I know that amongst some of the senior members in the health sector you can have leave balances that wind up at half a year and they don't get taken for rest and recreation they wind up being paid out when people change jobs or retire so it's partly those huge leave

[01:37:06] balances being there and it's the technicalities of the software companies I don't think are as important as the relationships it's a major change to the way the legislation will work and that changes the relationships between employers and employees and there's going to be quite a period of time to settle in as I say that pattern between works hours that attract leave compensation payment versus hours that are attracting leave and the way people want to sort that out the impact that has on rosters it's not just about the leave that you accumulate or the pay that's a really nice work in the workplace and our assessment is that there's going to be quite a period of shakedown needed Thank you David Thank you very much David

[01:37:52] committee just before we move on we have a member Phil Triford that wants to acknowledge some guests before they leave Thanks Chair colleagues this is a delegation with us who are from Cambodia and Laos program it's like a fellowship program for six months funded through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade We're waiting for you to be clear We're waiting for you to be clear Thank you very much for observing our submitting submitting submitting submitting I all want to be in peace Right we will move on now to the young workers

[01:38:38] resource centre we have online Matariki Roche Welcome Matariki Thank you so much for being with us today we've got ten minutes with you so we'll hand over it to you now Hi Matariki I'm Matariki I'm the comms and engagement coordinator at Young Workers Resource Centre we also hosted the wonderful delegation of young leaders from Cambodia and Laos so big shout out to them as well

[01:39:24] for coming along today First I just wanted to thank you all for your time and I'm going to take our submission as read I've got a couple of other points that I wanted to make just to build off our read submission Firstly I just kind of wanted to paint a picture for you actually about the reality of being a young worker at the moment Young workers are more likely to be in part-time casual or regular work we're more likely to be working additional hours often we feel that we cannot refuse those additional hours for fear of missing out on future shifts or for the need to catch up to our more experienced co-workers we have a vulnerability to getting sick

[01:40:10] there are often environmental factors like shitty crowded housing that means that we're more vulnerable to getting sick we have less negotiating power when it comes to negotiating our individual employment agreements we're more likely to be in low paid work we face the financial insecurity and the instability of things like youth rates, training wage and 90 day trials and along with that we're in a time of our lives where we the impact and the financial burden of unexpected service circumstances hit us harder and it's harder to absorb that so with that in mind

[01:40:56] we've deeply, deeply opposed the changes to the Holidays Act through this proposed employment leave bill we think that the proposed bill will exacerbate those inequalities that young workers already face that I just mentioned and we know that young workers will be missing out on leave particularly sick and you'll leave through those additional hours that they work we also know that they're going to have a harder time negotiating the bear minimum more than the bear minimum because of these changes moving from a days or weeks system to an hourly accrual makes it really hard as a young worker to negotiate that you know

[01:41:42] it's much easier to say hey can I have one more day of sick leave added to my contract rather than being like hey can we change the negotiation from 0.385 to whatever it might be so we also know that not only are the minimums going to be reduced but also the possibility of getting more will also be reduced we mentioned in our written submission that young workers are often misclassified as casual workers when the reality is that they are part-timers and we're also really concerned about the pathway forward for those misclassified workers because of this bill we often tell workers

[01:42:28] the young workers that come to us about the benefits of arguing for a permanent contract even if they're on low hours and they have to balance the benefits of that with the immense amount of fear and the very real possibility that they might lose their job or not be offered future shifts they raise that issue and now with the leave compensation payment what we will say is that those extra hours that we often say to employers hey just put them on a five hour a week contract even if they're more likely to be doing 10 or 15 if you put them on a permanent contract you can make those hours lower and in the current system their leave annual and sick leave will still accrue on that however in the proposed

[01:43:14] system that will no longer happen and so those benefits of going for that more permanent and secure working agreement is also lower because of this we also just frankly believe that that no entitlements no leave entitlements should be reduced because of any proposed bill we should be improving things as we go along making our working lives better for the generations coming up beneath us but this bill does not do that and we will say that in fact leave and general rights of workers particularly young workers will be eroded because of this young workers also have not been in the position to be able to contribute or have a say

[01:44:00] in or shape the employment system that we currently exist in we face all of these inequalities that makes it harder for us to have thriving lives that include work but we have not been able to have the contribution to shape the system that we're in whether that's because of you know the fact that the system changed so drastically before we were born or even just thinking about the workers that have come into the workforce since the last election but in saying that that means that you the committee actually had the real opportunity to think of young workers and keep us in mind when shaping what our employment system looks like just because we haven't had a say doesn't mean that we don't have the option to create

[01:44:46] something new and lastly with that I would just like to request that the committee supports the pledge proposed by the PSA that no entitlements or leave balances are reduced as a result of this bill we also support the recommendations and the submission made by the CTU as well as PSA youth. Thank you Thank you very much we have our first question from Carl Bates Thanks very much chair thank you for your submission I'm always a bit skeptical when submitters submit on a bill and are essentially of the view that it should entirely be got rid of so I just want to understand from you if you understand that your young workers

[01:45:32] also include pregnant young woman yeah and if you read our submission you would see the points that we supported of this bill so I'm just making sure in your verbal submission you're reflecting that you're not entirely against this bill and this bill does improve the outcomes for some workers not blatant you know get rid of the whole thing again if you read our submission you would have seen the points that we did support such as pace lips being mandatory leaving available from day one however we as we said in our submission we hold the position that you know improving some parts of our employment system

[01:46:18] should not come at the cost of reducing leave or reducing those rights for other workers it doesn't have to be this gives some take some we should be increasing to benefit for all No I appreciate that I'm just making sure it comes from the corridor live as well and the third part of that is doesn't this actually mean for young casual workers that they will receive their allowance at the 12.5% essentially meaning that they would be better off than if they just got sickly when they actually needed it during their casual work Yes and no the majority of the young workers on casual agreements that we come

[01:47:04] through one have been in the casual role with regular hours for more than six months so they do have entitlement to sick leave and while we differently support the recognition of the peculiarity of casual work that the LCP reflects we also know that it does put those who are misclassified particularly misclassified by actually all casual workers in a precarious issue where if you don't have that money that you received from the LCP in your last pay cycle doesn't actually mean a whole heap when you are sick in the current week and you need to take leave but you then don't have sick leave to take and can't pay your bills that

[01:47:50] week so while there is some benefit for that there is also there is still a cost and we are still going to see workers either taking unpaid sick leave or more likely I assume coming to work second and spreading the illness around So just to be clear rather than trusting that people can manage their own money and end up with more in the pocket because they receive this entitlement regardless of whether they take sick leave at all during the period your view is let's not give that to everyone and let's have a system that says only those that use their sick leave are the ones that get it

[01:48:36] I'm not sure if that's exactly what I'm saying I do think there should be some recognition for the precarious nature of casual work but I also think all workers should have the protection of sick leave it's a protection that benefits us all and it's a safety net that catches us which is particularly important when young workers are in precarious and vulnerable situations that already have a weakened safety net. Thank you and a question from Tiana Tiana. My questions around you gave an example where workers will end up having to calculate actually what their leave entitlement will

[01:49:22] and for me that sounded like that would provide less clarity and so I wanted to just check in with you to make sure that was the point that you were making because the point of this whole exercise is to make things clearer and that will make it less clearer for workers and then I've got a follow-up question from Matt. Kia ora and Tiana. Yeah 100% essentially it's going to make things clearer for workers. I've also had conversations supported by solidarity members here at YWRC and a few of those are employers a couple of them have reached out to me because they've said oh you know we've heard about how this is going to impact young workers and we want to give our workers our employees more than the minimum can we just give them you know extra 5, 10 days

[01:50:08] yada yada yada will maintain the 10 days and I was like yeah except you're still going to have to do that conversion and that was really unclear to them and these employers as well as these young workers yeah there was a lot of confusion harder to find a pathway forward it's less clear in short. My follow-up question is the comment she made around about around how people are up there told the casual workers but actually they're part-time workers I wonder if you could give some concrete specific examples that would be very clear for the committee Kia ora, yeah for sure so we had an ice cream worker at one of our workshops a couple of weeks ago and this young worker

[01:50:54] had been working at this ice cream shop for I think it was nearly two and a half years they worked consistently every Saturday you know frequent and those hours would increase during the summer times as you can imagine they've been working regularly at least every Saturday for over two years they were on a casual agreement when we described the working patterns like in our workshops we go through and we talk about employment types and when we explain what a part-time permanent employee looks like in comparison to a casual worker this young worker had this like penny drop moment of whole shoot I'm supposed to be a part-time worker they were really really scared when they learnt that they actually the reality of that means that their boss

[01:51:40] can just stop offering them shifts and that stability that they've gained over the past two years that reliance on this income would just instantly drop sorry I must stop you there because we've got to move on to our next submitter we've gone over time with you but really appreciate your contribution to the process and you're making yourself available for us today so thank you Kia ora we move on now to business south who we have online we have Shona Brown, Katarina Slade and Wilford Paul good afternoon

[01:52:30] members of the committee and chair I'm Shona Brown, advocacy advisor at business south and we are part of the Otago Chamber of Commerce and the shareholder of business New Zealand representing around 1400 businesses across Otago and Southland the Holidays Act has been a genuine pain point for our members for years with payroll examples like payroll errors costly remediation and real uncertainty about whether they're getting it right so we would like this reform to succeed and support the direction of the bill I'm sitting here not as a technical expert our role is to bring the lived

[01:53:16] experience of businesses on the ground and our submission is built directly from member consultation we were fortunate to have Minister Van Velden join a members only webinar only recently to walk through the bill and take questions which is directly shaped what we've raised in our submission so rather than speak to the content in our submission I've brought along a member I've got Katarina Slade and Wilford Paul from PurePack they're based in Cromwell and Central Otago they're exactly the kind of business this bill needs to work for they have a seasonal workforce with variable hours and weather dependent operations they can speak to both what's working in the bill and where the practical problems

[01:54:02] sit and possible solutions I'd encourage the committee to direct any detailed questions to both of them as they're far better placed than I am to bring those issues to life so thank you to the committee for your time and I'll hand over to Katarina Thank you Sharma I'd like to introduce ourselves a little bit further we're a cherry growing and pack house business in Cromwell our harvest season runs specifically from around well not quite specifically from the middle of December and that can shift around within a two week period due to the high uncertainty of it the harvest period runs for about six weeks sometimes seven we at peak employ 250 to 300

[01:54:48] people to work both on the picking and harvest side and in our packing operation many of our employees are backpackers on working holiday visas we've also got a reasonably good cohort of returning semi-retired employees and a few local school kids we support the bills direction overall and there are a lot of great components to it that we definitely agree with our verbal submission will pull out the parts that are concerning to us or that we think could be tweaked to work more appropriately for seasonal employment the first

[01:55:36] kind of area of concern I guess is around the LCP and sick leave obviously if you're a reverse engineer it's based on a 10 day entitlement or the equivalent thereof firstly that increases the cost to employers to the full 10 day entitlement which is more than what most permanent employees would cost because many of them don't actually take their full entitlement it's there if they need it and so it should be but it makes it slightly weighted towards the casual secondly and probably most importantly is a food handling organisation where we are processing cherries and there are 70 people coming into contact with the food

[01:56:22] granted there is a lot of PPE involved we strongly prefer that sick leave is actually used for genuine illness to prevent people coming to work when they're sick and coming into contact with cherries that are then going out into the world for consumption so paying out and cash that sick leave removes the incentive for an employee to call in sick on the day when they're generally sick they may feel able to do work but we still don't want them contaminating the product so that's why we're against cashing out any kind of sick leave and would prefer it's used bereavement leave is another one that we're a little bit worried about the potential for misuse so

[01:57:08] oh actually sorry I've skipped ahead yes we'll talk about the uncertainty factor in the LCP so there's a bit of rounding or uncertainty factor woven into that which would just like to raise that as an employer we equally experience that uncertainty factor we can offer someone when they're on a truly casual contract we offer them a shift and they don't have to accept it so that uncertainty is experienced both by the employee because they don't know if they're going to get off at a shift and by the employer who doesn't know if the employee is going to accept the shift and we have to build that variability into our business as well so we don't support there being extra compensation for that bereavement leave particularly in a short employment period

[01:57:56] there is not that built up trust as there is with a longer term employment arrangement and it is open to misuse if an employee two days into their contract they just need to be some kind of ability to make a reasonable request to check the evidence so that the integrity of the leave's purpose is protected I guess the largest concern for us is the assessment of an otherwise working day and we really appreciate the attempt to increase the clarity around that that is definitely needed the current

[01:58:42] legislation and interpretation is a real significant source of friction in our workplace and I think in a lot of seasonal businesses so definitely can acknowledge and agree that clarity is needed where the concern comes from is when we employ someone in the middle of December right when our harvest period starts for six week seven-week contract in that period there is a disproportionate number of public holidays or that fall and under the proposed assessment of looking at up to 13 weeks history but less if less exists you could end up in a situation where someone has only worked two days in that period

[01:59:28] and they decline every other shift that we offer them and they are entitled to then four days of paying public holiday leave so yes it would be very clear on what the entitlement is but in practicality it's waited too far equally on the other foot the opposite could happen someone could work every other day except that Friday and Saturday beforehand and not be entitled to a single public holiday but they actually worked more than someone who might be so it's a tricky I can see it's really tricky a potential suggestion which we have come up on how to

[02:00:14] tackle this issue is in the situation where a worker has a really short work history but or less than 13 weeks is to assume that over a 12-month period if they are doing casual work but they perhaps qualified for half of all the public holidays and include that in the LCP and have no other holiday entitlements that way it's clear what the entitlements are you don't get it you get an extra piece of payment for the fact that to compensate you for not being able to take the public holidays and it waits it across the workforce at every time of the year

[02:01:00] it's not disproportionately hitting businesses that like ours which are forced to harvest our crop during that summer period I believe that's Wilfred did I miss anything yeah we just want the burden of cost to be fair more equally spread and to remove in that short term where a really short work period exists to make it more equitable in a way that keeps the clarity that the bill aims for that's all I've got for you right thank you so much I just want to say really appreciate the constructive

[02:01:46] and helpful submission that you provided us just the detail and you know live examples are really helpful for us to work through so thank you for that and we'll move on now to our final submitter for today which is Unite Union Manitopu and that is Tali Williams with us online we'll move on thank you Welcome we have 10 minutes with you that includes time for question and we will leave it to you now Kia ora koutou I'm the Assistant National Secretary of Unite Union

[02:02:32] Represents Unite Union represents 5,500 members in fast food, hospitality, entertainment, hotels, cinemas and the call centre industries. We are opposing the Employment Leave Bill that would slash the pay and leave entitlements of tens of thousands of working people, mainly lower paid working people who are already struggling through the cost of living and the fuel crisis. Under this bill, the work completed outside of contracted hours would no longer accrue sick leave or annual leave, a change that would disproportionately affect park time and casual workers. These workers are our members in low paid industries. And further, these workers are already in percurious employment situations. These changes will only

[02:03:21] make life worse for them. We don't accept that the bill is about simplifying complex law. The findings and recommendations of the Holidays Act Task Force, which was in place to address complexities and reduce complexities has been largely ignored. The exploring of the hours based accrual system was discontinued by the task force part way through when they realised it financially disadvantaged a substantial number of workers compared to the current act. That seems to be no concern to the current government. As an example of affected industries, a substantive number of workers in fast food have a set amount of guaranteed hours. And then hours beyond that are considered additional

[02:04:09] hours to find a proposed bill. So over a sample of a 13 week period in 2025, to give an example, a third of hours worked over that period were not guaranteed under one May fast food brand that we cover. A worker within this fast food brand worked an average of 36 hours a week. However, only five of those hours were guaranteed with the others being classed as additional hours. That means under the new bill, this worker would only accrue leave based on her five guaranteed hours, which would be 0.38 of an hour per week accrued. This is unfair and untenable.

[02:04:55] To get one week's leave, this worker would have to work for two years. This for a worker who averages 36 hours and contributes to our economy pays her taxes and so on. The proposed 12% in lieu of a leave only confirms lack of understanding of the hand-to-mouth nature of those working in precarious and low paid employment. One in such a position cannot afford to put money aside to allow for leave to be taken at a later date. People will invariably need and use the money now, particularly in a cost of living crisis. If you don't have savings because you're trying to cover weekly costs, you are punished again with not being able to afford to take the leave.

[02:05:46] Then, of course, there's the reduction to sick leave. The same group of fast food workers that I referred to earlier under this bill would accrue sick leave for only two-thirds of the work that they do. Of course, the major issue with less sick leave for these workers is that they will come to work sick because they can't afford to take unpaid leave. This means passing on illness resulting in more sickness not only on site with their fellow workers, but the broader community because these people work with food and prepare and serve food. As we all know and have experienced, people are getting sick longer and more seriously these days with viruses such as COVID, RSV and

[02:06:34] so on. We know that under this bill, employers seeing what seems on the face of it to be a financial advantage will seek to offer the less amount of guaranteed hours and then simply top up hours as they wish. This means the less they will have to afford fair annual and sick leave. This risk of increased casualization will have a compounding negative effect on the community. Of course, the more precarious the work, the worse off the workers' lives, but also the less resources people have to put back into the economy. Precarious work also results in more exploitation and risk exploitation as people clamber for the dregs of hours their employer makes available and those workers feel compromised to raise

[02:07:23] various workplace concerns and even fear of raising serious health and safety risks. These are people already struggling on low wages and low hours during the cost of living crisis. It is shameful that the government is not only refusing to help those most of them need, but actively seeking to legislate to make life tougher for them. Working people deserve holidays and time with their families and they deserve to take the time off they need when they're sick and when their children are sick. Unite Union strongly opposes the attack on leave entitlements of the most vulnerable workers. Thank you. Thank you very much. Tali, we have our first question from Jan Tineety. Kia ora, Tali, and thank you very much for your submission this morning or this afternoon.

[02:08:12] And can I also say thank you for your example that you gave your case study that you titled the SS. I felt that was really, really helpful. When I was going through and we were determining Labour's position on this bill, our key rationale was that nobody would be worse off at the end than at the beginning. And obviously that's not the case. And when I first started, I was told it's only a few workers. But I'm getting the sense that we're talking about a lot of workers here. You say you represent five and a half thousand workers. How many of them would be in this situation or roughly how many of them would be in this situation if having guaranteed hours but then having to work way more hours on the on the roster? I would say about half

[02:09:03] conservatively. Yeah, so it's quite a big amount that we're talking about. And the question that I asked the Law Society before, is there a fear that the way that this is written at the moment incentivises that to happen more? Yes, absolutely. That is our fear. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. And question now from Tiana Tuoyono. Kia ora, Tali. Thank you very much for your very clear, clear submission and with a lot of really useful detail in there. I wanted to come back to your point around the hours of cruel system. And you were referencing, I think, the task force in 2018. I wasn't anywhere near Parliament then. I wonder if you could maybe tell us a bit more about the problems with that approach, why it was abandoned and what that impact of that will be on your members.

[02:09:54] Can I just, before you do that, Tali, just let you know you've got one minute left in your submission. So if we could make that brief. Okay. Well, in summary, I don't have a whole lot to say on that other than my understanding is that the findings of the task force without that hours based on cruel system wouldn't work. That it wasn't appropriate for all forms of work, particularly those part timers and casuals. And therefore that was abandoned. I don't have any more to say on that. Thank you. I really appreciate your participation in this process and you making the time to come and join us for our hearings today, Tali. Thank you again. And we'll now move into private session with our officials. Thank you.
