Speaker 1  00:00
And Mr. Conway, Chief Economist, we note and we welcome that this is your first monetary policy appearance. We look forward to some introductory comments, and then we've got a number of people signalled who'd like some interaction. So welcome Governor, and we look forward to

Ricardo Menéndez March  00:18
it.

Anna Breman  00:19
Thank you. So Good morning, Chair, good morning to me. Committee. It's good to be with you here today to talk about our monetary policy statement that we released yesterday. As you've already heard, I have assistant Governor Karen silk and Chief Economist Paul Conway with me, but we also have MP see members, Karl Hansen and Prasanna gay here in the room with us, as we announced yesterday, the MP see reached consensus to hold the OCR at two point 25% the slightly higher forward OCR pass reflects our somewhat stronger confidence in The economic recovery and balanced risk to inflation. We know that many New Zealanders are feeling stretched right now with costs for some essential items like food and electricity much higher than they were a year ago. While some parts of the country have benefited from high export prices, new job opportunities remain relatively scarce, especially in the bigger cities. The recovery is still at an early stage, but it is broadening across the economy. The labour market is stabilising, but unemployment remains high, and that means that there's still spare capacity on the economy. So the economic fundamentals are consistent with inflation falling to the target midpoint over the next 12 months. If the economy evolves as expected, monetary policy is likely to remain accommodative for some time. As the recovery strengthen and inflation falls sustainably to the target midpoint, monetary policy settings will gradually normalise. We will continue to assess incoming data carefully, and of course, if the outlook for inflation changes, the Monetary Policy Committee will adjust our monetary policy stance to ensure that inflation returns sustainably to the 2% target midpoint. So we look forward to your questions. Okay,

Speaker 1  02:26
thank you. Dr Brown, I'm going to go to the Honourable barbads First

Speaker 2  02:29
Tina katakato, and I also note some of your monetary policy committee members are here just we've got a couple of branches of questions. The first one is around forecasting confidence. So the MP s in November last year forecast inflation to be at 2.7% we have come now to the December obviously, those figures at 3.1% what lessons have you learned from that, given that that was a that was a miss, and obviously, is forecasting and what So, what have you learned from it? And what confidence? And what confidence do you have that inflation is going to track back down to that

Ricardo Menéndez March  03:06
2%

Anna Breman  03:08
it's a very good question, and it's true that inflation was at 3.1% it's outside of our target band, and it's high, and we're not at all comfortable with having inflation at that level. We have looked very carefully into the data, and we can see the things that were higher than expected. In the December quarter. It was mainly tradables, things like airfares and foreign accommodation and also fuel prices, and they tend to be very volatile. And then it was a little bit higher administered prices as well that affected non tradables. It is important, and we have discussed this at length, to the extent that they might be more persistent going forward. So when we look at these kind of data, we know, and we can see already from some January data that we got earlier that week, that some of that is falling back, like I know, that foreign accommodation fell by almost 15% in the in the January numbers. So that gives us confidence that some of that will fall out of the statistics. But then we always look to economic fundamentals, and when the economic fundamentals, they're very clearly in favour of inflation falling going forward, wage growth is modest. We do have spare capacity, so that's why we see this. But we are highly vigilant, and we know that there could be new shocks.

Speaker 2  04:29
So you mentioned administered costs, and one of the things that wasn't quite clear in the MP is, how does the Reserve Bank, what's the methodology you use to forecast administered costs. And I'm very sensitive to that, because that is one you can you know interest rates, building materials, etc, are sensitive to changes in interest rates, but costs generally a reflection of fiscal policy or local authority, like rates, for example. So.

Anna Breman  05:00
Now what's the methodology used there? Yeah. So first of all, we do have some information on administrative costs like university fees and vehicle licencing. We know that they won't be as high this year as last year. But then we have to make some assumptions. I'm going to hand over to Paul if you want to comment some more on the details.

Speaker 3  05:18
Thank you, Kevin, so for and you're right on it. Evans, like it was a significant miss the inflation number. I think we were on 2.7 and it came in at 3.1 and as the governor said, some of that was in the tradables side of the CPI basket. And essentially, because of volatility, there's some prices in there that bounce around by extreme amounts that's very difficult to predict on a quarter by quarter basis, and also non tradables, inflation didn't fall by as much as we thought it would, essentially because of these administered prices. So our forecasting of administered prices, it's very because they don't sort of move in the same way as prices in the private sector of the economy. They're not sensitive to monetary policy. We essentially take a sort of bottom up view. We try to get across what are the plans of all the councils across New Zealand in terms of rates, for example, what are policy settings with respect to university fees or vehicle licencing doing? We try to sort of get across as much of that as we can. And you know, we're confident that we for at least some of those components of administered prices, as again, as the governor said, that we won't be seeing as much inflation in 2026 as we did in 2025

Ricardo Menéndez March  06:36
sorry, the

Speaker 2  06:36
second, the second sort of branch of questioning. Thank you. Dr kumui is around transparency, Governor, that was one of the things that you when you first came in, that you

Todd Stephenson  06:46
said, looking at how

Speaker 2  06:47
you can make more transparent. It's quite through the monetary policy statement. I did note there was a little bit more commentary on some of the debate within the Monetary Policy Committee. And it seems to appear that there were there was a decision by consensus, as opposed to a unanimous decision, to hold the OCR, one of the comments that a member says supporting maintaining the OCR at current levels for now, but noted that if economic activity recovers as expected, monetary stimulus could begin to be withdrawn somewhat earlier than without compromising economic Recovery. Can you can? Can you just give us a bit more context as to why those comments are made, and a bit more as to the debate and response in relation to that?

Anna Breman  07:29
Yes, thank you. And I think for us, it's really important to show the discussion that we have throughout the process, because, as you said before, there is always risks to the inflation outlook, and there's always uncertainties, and there's also uncertainties around exactly what monetary stance is appropriate. So one member did discuss the fact that even if the economy evolves as we expect, maybe we could withdraw stimulus a little bit earlier, and some another member made an argument why we might want to keep policy accommodative even for a little bit longer with the same forecast. And that is because it's a little bit hard to assess exactly how firms pricing behaviour will look going forward. Some people think that if we are too confident that we'll see a strong economic recovery, firms might all coordinate and start hiking prices sooner. Other people think that other forces will push it back, and these kind of things we're constantly following and trying to judge where we are in the cycle, and it is uncertain. And we have to be humble in saying that, you know, we can't know with 100% certainty exactly how firms will behave in this cycle.

Ricardo Menéndez March  08:49
So

Anna Breman  08:49
that is kind of the foundation for the discussion.

Speaker 2  08:52
And have you given any more of like, how is your significant development in relation to that transparency side? So quite clear. A little bit. There is a bit more in here that we can sort of point to and ask questions on. But have you developed your thinking more particularly around what we see overseas with actually Monetary Policy Committee members actually being quite clear where they voted, or whether, if, even if you didn't vote, you know what their comments were, and a summary of the why they decided to keep things at the way they are or not?

Anna Breman  09:21
Yeah. So we started those discussions, and that is part of the charter, and the charter is an agreement between the Monetary Policy Committee and the finance minister. So after this monetary policy round, we will have another meeting to further discuss those things. But the discussions so far have been very constructive. So we are. We are moving in that direction. I don't know if Paul or Karen might want to comment as well, like

Speaker 3  09:47
as the Governor announced yesterday, we are going to move to eight meetings a year. Is because we're going to get monthly CPI data, which is very welcome. Develop. Commitment and yeah, so that's kind of the first tranche of the of that piece of work. And there will be, we are kicking it around as the committee in a very constructive way, and there'll be more to come in that vein.

Speaker 2  10:12
So so just to clarify, so is it your belief that, because of the charter, you need to get either approval from the Minister of Finance to be able to change some of or to open up a bit more of the decision making process to report on it. You can't just do that off your own legislative powers

Anna Breman  10:33
that formally it's an agreement. So we have so we need a discussion, which is completely normal, but what we're doing is that we wanted to have this for this was my first monetary policy round, yeah, so we did really want to have it, look at the process, see how are we doing this? And then we have meetings to evaluate what kind of things do we want to change going forward. And those discussions have been very constructive. So it's just not stressing something. So we do what is appropriate for for the New Zealand economy and our setting here in New Zealand.

Speaker 2  11:07
Yep, totally acknowledge that it's more just legally you are independent and you don't necessarily my understanding of how you read the Reserve Bank Act is that you don't need to get approval from the Minister of Finance to make the decisions around this, or is it, or have you received other advice?

Anna Breman  11:25
No, so, so the only thing is that the there are, there's the act, and then there is the Monetary Policy Committee Charter, and that charter is formally an agreement, so it's just that it

Speaker 2  11:38
will be always trump.

Ricardo Menéndez March  11:39
Yeah,

Speaker 2  11:40
the charter, thank you

Speaker 1  11:43
very good. I'm gonna go to Dr Deborah

Speaker 4  11:45
Russell, thank you. Fascinating reading, as always, look. I want to dig a little bit into what's going on with households, because there were some comments yesterday that suggested that we need households to spend more in order to push a recovery along, but at the same time, sitting in the monetary policy statement on page, can't see the page number. It must be about 12, a comment that households have been saving, possibly in response to limited employment opportunities and uncertainty about the economic outlook. And then, if we go through to page 25 we saw a whole lot of households racing to fix their mortgages in December, following the MP s in November. So what I'm feeling from that is a whole lot of uncertainty in households and nervousness. Of course, unemployment, I know more people have entered the employment market, but unemployment has also gone up. So what I had that just links to, you know, some pretty strong changes to our employment conditions that have gone through parliament in the last few days, which creates much more uncertainty for workers. So I'm linking all of those things together. What on earth are households going to spend to drive this economy, given the huge uncertainty that's sitting around?

Anna Breman  13:20
So there is uncertainty still, particularly around the global economy, and households have a few years behind them. That's been really hard. It's been high unemployment, high inflation. It is looking better when we're looking ahead, so we can see that employment is actually growing. So there's more people also going into the labour force, and that's often an early stage that in the new recovery, that we see more people entering the labour force and actually seeing more employment, but unemployment remains high, and that is of concern to us. So households, what we're seeing is we're seeing that consumption is starting to increase, but it's relatively weak growth in consumption compared to historical patterns. So what we expect is, then, when households see that the labour market is actually strengthening, and when households see that inflation is falling and their purchasing power come back, that will give them a bit more certainty. And the other thing is, is that we do see the savings rates have been a little bit on the high side, and quite a lot is in just regular savings accounts. So some households will have ability to increase their consumption, and other people are still really, really stretched. But we do expect to see how we're higher household consumption going forward, which will boost the economy. Consumption is almost 60% of GDP growth. Maybe I don't know, you're also very

Speaker 3  14:45
like I'd also argue the fact that more people are fixing their mortgage mortgages is a sign of there's more certainty there about the interest rate cycle. I think the fact that we've indicated that we at the trough with. The OCR has incentivized people to go and fix their mortgages

Speaker 2  15:04
for longer

Speaker 3  15:07
instead of which is what we saw in that graph that you reference. I also the labour market is going to need to become more important in household consumption decisions. One thing that we talk about in the document is, because we don't have, we don't have a rapid house price appreciation in the forecast, and that sort of has been a kicker for consumption growth in the New Zealand economy through a wealth effect for a long time. But something's changed there. So we're

Ricardo Menéndez March  15:35
not, yeah,

Speaker 3  15:36
we're not seeing that so, but we, you know, we do see the labour market recovering. You know, growth in wages from a monetary policy perspective is consistent with inflation at 2% which we're very pleased with. But in terms of take home pay, it is a it is a bit stronger. And, you know, we see, as I said, we see the labour market improving, and which will give, you know, as well as a bit more sort of income coming through the door in the term and form of wages. Just a bit more certainty in a recovering economy will probably diminish that precautionary incentive to save

Speaker 5  16:12
and we need to think about not just the most recent interest rate cuts. You've got to think about the absolute story and the degree of change we've seen since August, actually nearly 18 months now. But you know, the OCR is down 225 basis points. Wholesale two year swap, which is important factor in the two year mortgage rate, which we all know is a flavour of the month, usually four kiwis. That's down 270 basis points. So that takes time for that transmission to flow through into the economy.

Speaker 1  16:51
So

Speaker 5  16:53
activities go up as that transmission goes through. Is in addition to what we're already seeing on the export side of the economy as well, which has got real strength. So we still have some of that two speed economy here occurring here. So the South Island is much better than the parts of the North Island.

Speaker 1  17:15
Okay. Dr, ru,

Speaker 4  17:16
carry on.

Speaker 5  17:17
So

Speaker 4  17:18
what I mean as I read this, read this. MP s, I would characterise it as being faintly nervous and uncertain, and that's how households feel, which is why they're trying to lock in savings and lock in those low interest rates. And I know the South Island is recovering well, Christchurch is the place to be at the moment, but Auckland is not. And so I wonder to what extent you've engaged in that sort of analysis. We know that a lot of the time Auckland does drive the economy, but that doesn't, it doesn't feel as though things are happening there, yet that's reckons and feels but is pulling off. What I do see is given to given you discussed in the OCR and your committee itself, differing views of the same facts. I think that's

Speaker 3  18:07
absolutely physics, yeah,

Anna Breman  18:09
but it but it's true that we do see, and we do stress that there are differences across regions, and it is more export led recovery this time compared to more consumption led but the export LED Side is still very positive. And as Karen pointed out, it's really important to remember that the OCR cuts 5.5% down to two point 25 that will still pass through, and there's still a number of households and firms that will get the stimulus from lower interest rates during this year,

Speaker 3  18:41
it's quite you're quite right that Auckland needs to fire for this economy to grow sustainably, long term. And historically, as I was saying earlier, a lot of that has been driven by house prices. So in the absence of that, you know what? What is it? What is going to what? What's the Auckland story?

Speaker 1  19:00
Very good. Speaking of Auckland. MP for Northcote. Mr.

Speaker 6  19:04
Chair, Dr Brennan, welcome. Thank you. Paul. Karen, the back there. Hey, just looking at your media release. You talk about inflation's most likely returning within band in the current quarter. Now the bank has historically been too late to act on going up, going down. I'm just keen to get a sense from you on forward casting to April's meeting, if we're still outside band, what that might mean for the path right at the pathway for the OCR, for the bank next 12 months.

Anna Breman  19:46
Yeah. So it is always difficult to do this kind of forecasting, because we have a lot of these volatile items that can push inflation up or down in the near term. And. And we are this why we have to do two things. We have to look at, what are the fundamentals driving inflation in the medium term, and what are the risks in the near term, if inflation turns out to again be higher than than expected? Of course, that is a big reason for concern. But even if it is another quarter when inflation is above the target band. If it's clearly very volatile items, and we have good reasons to believe that they will fall out of the data, we might not need to titer sooner. But if it is the case that we see that this is actually something in price setting behaviour, or the recovery is much stronger, so we can see that that would mean that the economy will be stronger going forward, and they can stay sustain higher interest rates, then we would act and talk about tightening earlier. But one, one outcome on the inflation number has to be analysed in details to see what are the drivers of the medium term. I mean, because our goal is the medium,

Speaker 5  21:02
yeah, and when we look at it at the moment, there's, there's probably three things that that we're caught we also call out is that core inflation is below and remains within the band, and the average is around 2.4% so that gives you some confidence. Wage growth has declined quite dramatically, and we're back at around that 2% level, and we have significant spare capacity within the economy. So when we think about the things that monetary policy will have the greatest effect on, that domestically generated the conditions there are to bring that back. So it is for us, we can't predict what those shocks might be, and there are real risks that exist today, globally, in the market. And so it is important that we actually understand if something were to jump what, as the governor said, what is actually driving that jump up? And is it something we should look through, because our goal is around medium term inflation and getting it back and holding it there sustainably, but the conditions, we have confidence in those underlying conditions.

Speaker 6  22:10
Thank you. Canada,

Ricardo Menéndez March  22:12
one question

Speaker 6  22:14
is around the neutral rate, and you talk about the output gap of 1.5 and so in terms of the neutral OCR, what's the bank's view of where that may land eventually?

Anna Breman  22:37
But I can start, and then you can compliment my comments, but that we do have an estimate a band for between about two point 25 and 4% and that's a very wide range. We do think that the best estimates are closer to around three, maybe two and a half to three and a half. And that means that we're now accommodative. And when it was 5.5 it was clearly tightening. And these numbers are uncertain, you have to be a bit careful, and that's why we're always so careful in terms of reading all the incoming data, because just relying too much on saying, Oh, the neutral rate is exactly 3% then we risk not doing the right thing going forward. But we do, because we talk, discuss quite a lot the you know, how much spare capacity we have, we have an estimate for the output gap of minus 1.5% but also there, there's a bit of uncertainty. And then when you look at the risks that we say, we're saying that one of the risk is that maybe we have less spare capacity, or the potential to grow is weaker, and then we could see inflationary pressures earlier than we expect, and that would mean that we were tightened earlier. Okay,

Speaker 1  23:46
we're gonna go to Dr Megan woods. Thanks, Dan,

Speaker 7  23:49
thank you, and thank you for your report. This report, like the last, I don't know how many we've received, has a huge section on and over sort of overarching theme of uncertainty from global factors and not knowing. But I just wonder to what extent the bank has kind of looking a bit closer, rather than the big, wide world, in terms of what's happening in Australia, we're seeing inflation high there. We're seeing it's the first of the banks that we kind of track to initially raise its rates this year they've started their upward track, and to what extent you're watching what's happening there, in terms of the Equal and opposite effect of New Zealand, we've had record numbers of migration to Australia from New Zealand, highest since 2012 nei what was it net loss of 46,400 New Zealanders to Australia in the last decade. Higher wages, better jobs, are the things that are luring people across the Tasman. So to what extent do shifts that happen in Australia? Are you factoring in flow ons for what's going to happen in New Zealand?

Anna Breman  24:57
Yeah, it's very important, and we do follow it. Closely we do if we look at the drivers of inflation in Australia, they've had comparatively higher growth than New Zealand. Over the past two years, wage growth is considerably higher. The labour market has been stronger. We do think that this is changing now, so it will be more in favour of New Zealand, but there's always a risk that when we compare, we look at the differences to say that, look New Zealand is different, so we won't see those inflationary pressures here, and we are, we are taking that into consideration to make sure that we're not missing anything. But the fundamentals over the past few years have been different than the drivers of inflation has been different. But maybe Paul, you like to comment, I

Speaker 3  25:45
would you know, it was interesting over covid, where monetary cycles were so coordinated across countries because of the global shock, affected everybody in more or less the same way. And we've sort of come to the end of that, of that period, and now we are seeing significant cyclical differences across economies, including across Australia and New Zealand. It's quite unusual that our cash rate is lower than in Australia, that interest rates in general are lower here than they are in Australia. But again, it's a reflection of where we are in the cycle. I would say that structurally, over recent decades, Australia is a fundamentally stronger economy than New Zealand for a variety of reasons that essentially come down to higher productivity. But currently in terms of the cycle, in terms of monetary policy, we have lower inflation and lower interest

Speaker 7  26:40
rates and supplementary to that, in terms of the kind of equal and opposite effects that we feel in New Zealand, of that, I guess, migration is one of them, where we're outflows of New Zealanders to Australia. When we have a look at the modelling that looking to immigration increasing to about 30,000 people, what happens in Australia is going to be material on that when we have that large net out that's right, sitting there. So to what extent have you factored in? There could be either a slowdown of New Zealanders leaving for Australia, if job opportunities there lie down, and even New Zealand is starting to come back, so that we see those migration patterns we've considered that, and we actually

Speaker 3  27:23
had a good conversation about it around the MP See table. I think the relative position in our business cycle is quite a fundamental driver of trans Tasman migration different when the labour markets are in two different places. So it is entirely feasible that we could see that migration outflow. And I should say that migration data is is, has been revised down quite consistently over the year, over the course of the last year. It's a bit ropey, that data, but, but, yeah,

Speaker 5  27:55
but that outlooks built on least apart substantially less departures.

Ricardo Menéndez March  28:01
That's right.

Speaker 3  28:02
That's right,

Speaker 5  28:02
not necessarily substantial increases above

Speaker 6  28:05
the

Speaker 5  28:06
numbers that we've seen once on today.

Speaker 7  28:08
And I guess when you look structurally at that group that has been moving, 40% of them have been in the 18 to 30 age population. But in terms of some of the things that we think about in terms of drivers of our own domestic inflation, like house prices, these kind of shifts are going to make a material impact. Yes, yeah.

Speaker 3  28:29
I think affordability in Auckland, for example, in terms of house prices to income, is now better than it is in the likes of Sydney.

Anna Breman  28:37
Yeah,

Speaker 7  28:37
but we could see that move if we start to see an inverse in the in the in the those migration numbers, and particularly net impacts and outflows of New Zealanders,

Ricardo Menéndez March  28:46
we're

Speaker 8  28:47
gonna go to Dr David Wilson, oh, okay, thank you. You've talked about more accommodative monetary policy. That's usually to my ears, and an export led recovery. There's this kind of notion now that we've got tradable inflation. And I just want to flip onto the import side, because that's actually interesting, I think, in terms of what's changed. So my question is really around, what's the nature of that import inflation? Are we talking more consumables, or is there some plant machinery about expenditure in there?

Ricardo Menéndez March  29:20
That

Anna Breman  29:21
is a very give

Ricardo Menéndez March  29:21
you

Speaker 8  29:21
a completely different

Anna Breman  29:23
Yeah. So, so so far, we've seen now, just in the last data for over the couple of months, now that we see more business investments, and we're also seeing manufacturing picking up quite considerably, and that should mean that we should see more machinery and things like that coming in. I haven't seen the import data in that kind of detail, but it's a very good question. The other thing, if you look at the import side, is we're actually seeing little bit more when we look forward, little bit more stability and import prices. We. Is good in terms of the inflationary side. And we're also seeing inflation in our main, main trading partners, being stable, actually. So that gives us one of the reasons we have a little bit more confidence that we'll see inflation in line with target

Speaker 8  30:16
supplementary TI, you're dealing with the constellation of factors here we've, you know, highlighted by today, which side you're looking on, tradables, non tradables, whether it's administrative, all these things are adding up to, it just a huge constellation. So my question is slightly different in terms of the fact of, how do we get a handle on this quicker? And are you thinking around using AI to, you know, give you some multi factorial analysis so we get the information quicker.

Anna Breman  30:45
Yes, it's one of the most hardest thing when we're sitting doing policy that the data is lagging and we would like to have much more real time information. So we are looking for all the factors that can give us more information about what's happening in real time. Another part of that is what we're all very committed to, and it's also part of our transparency, is that we we will go and meet with businesses, because when we meet with the businesses, they can actually tell us what they're planning on doing, and then give us more information about where the economy is heading. We have some forward looking indicators, the Pm is the psis, and all of these are good, but actually going to meet with businesses all around the country will also give us an additional sense of where the economy is heading. So I'm heading to Christchurch. Later today, I'll meet with several businesses in Christchurch, Auckland next week, and our other fellow MPC members will also travel the country and meet with businesses and households just to get that extra information. Yeah,

Speaker 8  31:46
and the regional is very

Speaker 3  31:48
Can I just add Sorry, sorry. Chair. New Zealand is a poorly measured economy, and that is a pain for the Monetary Policy Committee, and we welcome the government's investment in states. Ng, we look forward to monthly CPI and better quality macro data in general, and we are supplementing that. There are, you know, really interesting private data sources available at the moment that are a bit timely, that they're not a substitute for that sort of national data infrastructure. But we are exploring all of that and using AI to get on top of what they're okay,

Speaker 1  32:20
we've got to start. Just quick start from Dan

Speaker 6  32:22
Bidwell, yeah, can you just get a sense of how this real time, kiwi, GDP, Nowcast is doing? I mean, it's very up and down variable. But is the bank serious and kind of using that as a tool? If so, what are the learnings from that? What are your observations?

Speaker 3  32:40
I look at it every Friday afternoon like it's a really good summary of what happened that week in terms of that higher frequency data. So yeah, it's very it's very useful. And yes, it does bounce around. We're volatile economy,

Ricardo Menéndez March  32:54
yeah,

Speaker 2  32:54
yeah,

Ricardo Menéndez March  32:55
okay, we're

Ricardo Menéndez March  32:56
gonna go to Ricardo manege, Mai, thank you. Just got some quick fire questions. Is the spending necessary in the next quarter to fix infrastructure damage through the climate change charge weather events likely to impact on inflation, and thus your projections on inflation in the official cash rate as the recovery costs become more clear, and if so, do you have any reflections?

Anna Breman  33:17
It's a good question. So in terms of we've had really bad weather events, and I think that we always have to think about the people being affected by this, first foremost, because it is been really hard, and we've actually seen some lives lost because of this. We do know that it tends to create volatility in the data, if you just take the monetary policy perspective. So you looked, food prices were a bit higher than expected. Now, again, in January, in our preliminary data, that could have been due to severe weather. We know that that tends to bounce back after a while. So if you get a spike in food prices from weather, it tends to come back down again. But then you can also have temporary effects on GDP, but they tend to be temporary. I don't know if Paul or Karen like to comment as well, so

Ricardo Menéndez March  34:04
I'll just move quickly to chapter five of your report, where you talk about residential investment. When you talk about residential investment projected to increase over the medium term, can you spell out to the committee whether you're talking about investors that are speculating on pre existing properties or developing new properties, or what kind of mix and ratio are you talking about? You talked about the Auckland economy previously, mostly had been left for expensive homes. How much of the growth that you're seeing in residential investments is just speculation effectively?

Anna Breman  34:35
Yeah, so I think that we see an uptick in residential investments, which is likely a good thing, because we don't want under supply of homes. But I think it's also an effect of the fact that the OCR has been cut by from five to two point 25 so that is spurring some of these investments. Then exactly how the composition is? I don't know, Paul, it's construction.

Ricardo Menéndez March  34:59
Yeah. But

Speaker 3  35:00
that is construction. It's not house flipping or anything like that. It's renovating and building new islands.

Ricardo Menéndez March  35:07
Okay, just a quick supplementary in that, Mr. Chair, because previously, with your former monetary policy statement this term in Parliament, you have explicitly stated that the government's decisions to shift the bright line test and restore interest deductibility, not colloquially as the landlord tax cut would increase housing speculation. You're kind of now saying that the residential investment side of things will likely be through action. How does those two statements add up?

Speaker 3  35:34
Like we like we only incorporate a policy into our forecast, if it's once it's changed. Like, I think what you're talking about, the bright line test, etc, etc, is more about having an effect on house prices. Like, I would actually argue that there may, there may well have been a structural change in the housing market, and I do think that we have gotten better at building houses. There's been changes in zoning restrictions, and not just recently, but over the last decade, particularly in Auckland, around intensification, etc, etc, and that is having an impact on, you know when, when we lower interest rates and demand for housing increases? It used to be the case because the supply side was so sticky that that would just translate into higher house prices, and we'd get a sort of wealth kicker through through that channel. Now, if that supply side is more free to sort of respond, an increase in demand for houses is more likely to end up generating more construction activity. We see it through activity, instead of through houses and through prices. And this is a very welcome development. I think it's sort of a little bit early to sort of call, yeah, there's a structural change there. It could turn around with population growth starts to increase, etc, etc. But it may well be the case that we've had a structural change in how the housing market operates in New Zealand.

Ricardo Menéndez March  37:06
And finally, Mr. Chair, just my last up. Can you be clear whether you would have done anything differently with this monetary policy statement and Official Cash Rate position if you still religious leader to consider maximum sustainable employment,

Speaker 3  37:20
that's a little bit hypothetical. You know, we still really take the labour market into consideration, because it affects inflation. You know, if it was a bit more front and centre, I don't know. I don't know. Like, I do think that regular changes in our mandate do have an effect on how we set monetary policy, and I think we should. I don't think that we our mandate should be changed too easily or too frequently, because I think it is at the margin a little bit destabilising.

Speaker 5  38:00
Yeah. Look, the policy is definitely accommodative, right? And what we see is Labour conditions will improve over over the next 1224, months. And I think that you would argue supports maximum sustainable employment, because it's heading in the right direction. So you've got, you can't just look at, is the OCR, the only thing that makes those changes. That is why it was never a target. Was only ever you could support that. And I think that the policy stance we have in existence today supports improvements in employment from here.

Speaker 3  38:42
I think that's a good point.

Speaker 1  38:43
Okay, we'll leave it at that. We're going to We're entering the rapid fire section now. So that's rapid questions, and if we can as succinct answers as possible to get us through as much as we can in the next 10 minutes. Nancy, Lu,

Speaker 9  38:54
thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome back. Geffner. Global Growth, I think it's, it's held up better than a lot of people have expected in our country, but also around the world and but obviously a lot of uncertainty. So what is the specific global channels that you the committee and as governor will be more focused on for the next six to 12 months, whether it'll be trade or financial conditions, oil or shipping, China or Asian demand? What would that be

Anna Breman  39:21
also, actually, we have to look at all of those factors. That's really our job. So but of course, our main trading partners are the most important if you look at the global economy. So we do look to growth in our main trading partners, because it's so important for our exporting firms. We look at the inflationary pressures as well in our main trading partners, because that will affect import prices and export prices, which are important for the economy. We do take financial conditions into consideration. So we have discussed not just the tightening of financial conditions, but also that the whole yield curve we've seen steepening and bond term premium going up over the. Past few months, after what's happened in Japan, for example. So we do take these things into consideration, and then we do we look at consensus forecast to do our assessment of our global growth is hedging and how it's affecting us. But again, we're focusing on our main trading partners. And then, as always, you know, in terms of the risk assessments, we have to look at the global economy as well. So we do that.

Speaker 1  40:25
Okay? We'll go to Todd Stevenson.

Todd Stephenson  40:27
Thank you. Thank you, Governor. Good to hear you're getting out and about around the country. The Kiwi summer might not have been quite what

Ricardo Menéndez March  40:34
you've been Sweden.

Speaker 7  40:38
Oh,

Todd Stephenson  40:41
anyway, in your opening comments, you talked about the recovery is broadening across the economy. What does that mean?

Anna Breman  40:52
Well, it's a good question. It's really important to us. So we've really seen over the past few years that the agricultural sector has been performing well. Commodity prices has been high, and that has been supporting the New Zealand economy. And now we're seeing that manufacturing is also starting to increase a bit more. It's partly related to agriculture, but not only, I think we're forgetting sometimes that we actually have a tech sector that's also doing really well in New Zealand, and they are very global from the beginning, and they are also there's high paid, high productive jobs. But what we're wanting to see is also the domestic side improving in a wider sense. And thus has been the if you look at small businesses that mainly are affected by domestic conditions, they've had a hard time for many years. Tourism is also coming back, actually, if we look at the numbers. So the what we mean by the broadening is seeing more sectors performing well and lifting the whole economy. And we're seeing this beginning of that, but we want to see more of

Todd Stephenson  41:53
it. And so is it your hope? Then that? Yeah, and again, we talked a lot about kind of what households are feeling. But is it your hope? Then we'll see maybe the hospitality sector, cafes, restaurants start to again, experience maybe some more growth,

Anna Breman  42:07
yes, and when households feel that the labour market is strengthening and also inflation coming back, so they feel that the purchasing power is coming back, then that tends to boost the domestic economy. And that's also why we keep on stressing that it's so important to get inflation back to a lower, stable level, this 2% midpoint that we keep on talking about, because then we see wages being higher than inflation, and that is really what we give houses, the purchase and power in addition to and I

Todd Stephenson  42:36
suppose, from your perspective in Kiwis have got certainty about where things are hitting

Speaker 2  42:40
Yeah, thank

Speaker 1  42:42
you. Okay.

Ricardo Menéndez March  42:43
Thank

Speaker 1  42:43
you, Todd. We're going to go back to the honourable Barbara Edmonds.

Speaker 2  42:46
Thank you, Paul. You and I have had this conversation before around why New Zealand has low productivity, you know, and the Productivity Commission and yourself earlier speech, I said last year before very clear those five key areas right where we are geographically shallow pools of capital, uplift and innovation and Tech Research and Development and access to capital. You've just done a review of the capital requirement rules for the banks. We've had the banks come in for part two of the banking inquiry in the last week. Again, when we talk to the banks, particularly one bank, they were saying, because of that, they were able to provide more lending, about $20 billion to housing and $7 billion to business. What is it that we need to do around that access to capital? Because it's clear that that's where the market is going. Still heavily on the property side, we don't have a very diverse economy like Australia that can take shocks better. What else is there available for policymakers to help actually encourage the banks? Yes, investing in business is a bit riskier, but we need that part of the sector to help us lift productivity. What are the sort of questions we should be asking and what are the sort of policies we should be looking

Anna Breman  44:14
Do you want to start? Or do you want

Speaker 2  44:16
I can

Anna Breman  44:18
just start by saying that, you know, if you look at the capital review, one of the things that we did there, it was giving the banks better ability to lend to the productive side of the economy as well, but it was also proportionate, so it makes it easier for the smaller banks to compete with the larger ones. And that is also one of the things that we're doing to enhance competition in the banking sector, and that is important. There is another number of steps that we're working with as well, in terms of looking at who can actually use the word bank, that kind of thing. But it's also, it seems like a small thing, but it might be important just for these smaller ones to compete. Also access to our payment system has been broadened, which is also opening up. New entrance. Then, with that said, we always have to be careful, and we can't grant a bank licence if people are not fulfilling basic requirements. So we will ensure that we have the financial stability side, the prudential supervision in there as well. But competition is a key focus for us in terms of the work we're doing on that side. Yeah, then there's other things are related to productivity as well. So

Speaker 3  45:24
like, just high level, the potential is there for New Zealand to lift its productivity in a fundamental way, like the gap between productivity in New Zealand the way we use technology, essentially, compared to other leading OECD economies, is large. And if we did get our policy settings right, the potential for new technologies to diffuse into this economy and throughout this economy is high. It's sort of all there for the taking. And, you know, AI is kind of the latest thing, you know, what are we doing to sort of grab hold of the benefits of that? I think that is a policy question, and also private sector behaviour as well and banking,

Speaker 5  46:02
the thing that I think you made the point that banks look at is how much risk do they want to take into their portfolio, and definitely, small business in particular is more risky than obviously lending to on a household where you have an underlying asset sitting in there. So cash flow lending into small business is definitely more risky, and so you would definitely see them not apply as much going into there. What the shallow pool of capital and the level, the quantum of capital that is available for those businesses to expand is one of the critical issues that needs to be addressed here in this economy, because banks will only continue to pour more into here on the basis that they see more stability in that cash flow generation. When it's a small business, it's much more volatile. So that's an equity risk that you're talking about, rather than necessarily a debt risk. Yeah.

Speaker 1  47:08
Okay, final question from me, and this is paint a picture question, Governor, what can Kiwi consumers, homeowners, employees, small businesses, investors, what can they likely expect economically? Looking at through to 2026

Anna Breman  47:28
they can expect an economy that is recovering. They can expect stronger employment growth. They can expect stronger growth overall, in more sectors. It's it's going in the right direction for New Zealand,

Speaker 3  47:44
and they can expect low and stable complexion.

Speaker 1  47:47
Thank you. Fantastic.

Speaker 7  47:49
Through you, Mr. Chair, a couple of times it was fascinating. You talked about the move in some of the different data sets they're starting to use to supplement the official stats data, and also the use of AI, which I think is a really interesting and important development. I think it would be useful perhaps at the next MP even to have an extra 10 minutes a special session just for us to be briefed on the shifts there and what that looks like. Thank you.

Speaker 1  48:17
That's fine, and we will expect to see you after the next MP on Eighth of April, so see you on the night.

Ricardo Menéndez March  48:24
Thank

Speaker 1  48:24
you so much.

Ricardo Menéndez March  48:25
Thank you really appreciate

Ricardo Menéndez March  48:26
it. That concludes.

Speaker 1  48:28
It off to your next select

Ricardo Menéndez March  48:30
committee. Thank you.


Transcribed by https://otter.ai