[00:00:00] We have only 20 minutes with you and we want to really focus on intellectual property and copyright legislation. If you would like to start with some opening remarks, if you keep them brief so that members get enough time to ask questions, that would be really helpful. Thank you. So, Chair, members of the committee, thanks for the opportunity to speak today. I'll start maybe with why this conversation matters to us. For us, intellectual property is how New Zealand turns great science into real world impact. I think as every time

[00:00:48] I've been to a select committee, we've brought some of that real world impact with us to show you. So, yeah, we knew you'd expect morning tea. So, we've brought some snapples for you, some that are not commercially available. So, for us, it's not theory. It's actually what we do every day. And I love the fact that we're having select committee discussions around intellectual property. I think it's great and it's always timely. For us, that's where great ideas meet real world impact and create value for New Zealand and in a lot of cases beyond that. So, I'll give a couple of practical views of how IP works for us on the ground. And as I said, we've brought some intellectual property with us today because while IP has legal frameworks, patents, plant variety rights, great innovation and complex multi-jurisdictional alignment, it's quite often something you can hold and in this case, eat. So, I'll

[00:01:36] give you a bit of a sense of scale. So, over the last decade for the bio economy sciences to shoot our royalty revenues have grown from around 27 million to this year forecast just over $100 million. That makes us the largest royalties earner in the country. Great for us as an organisation that's all re-invested in science but actually the thing that's great for New Zealand is those royalties only come off the back of commercial success. So, that's one of the things we really like about the royalties. So, when you think of us, obviously, we've had flat to declining government investment. So, this is a way to keep investment going back into science, which is excellent. So, look, our model is quite simple but really deliberate. We invest in long-term science. We develop intellectual property. We partner with industry incubators.

[00:02:23] We create new products and in some cases companies generate royalties, equity and returns and then in our case, we invest those back into the next generation of the same thing. So, we do it across a range of areas, licensing, joint ventures, startups and we've got a few examples of research for equity models as well. So, one of the things we quite enjoy is the flexibility that we have to be able to take different approaches because there's no one size fits all for us. So, historically, in our case, we've had a lot of commercialisation that's been science sort of push, which is great. We think there's absolutely a place for that to continue but we are starting to evolve where we're increasingly balancing that towards being more market poll as well. So, what are the things people are asking for? What are the things industry investors,

[00:03:11] entrepreneurs are asking for? How does science connect in with that to make their great ideas even better and more sticky? So, the idea is to sort of move from alongside sort of saying, what can we do with our sciences? What problems does the world need solved and how can our science help? So, one of the things I guess as we talk around things like policy and I've touched on this already is just cautioning on making things too rigid. So, as I said, the flexibility that we've had has been excellent. We've had everything from spin outs research for equity. We've had spin outs that we've kept equity. So, we've been on the cap table for. We've had spin outs where we haven't. We've had spin outs where founders have gone out of the Institute into the

[00:03:56] new start-up. We've had ones where they haven't. All of those have worked well for us. And when you look at intellectual property, there's quite a spectrum. So, if you think of sort of some of the shorter cycle innovation, a new software tool, a new device, they're quite often built by quite a discrete team, a few people that rolls out. Then you look at the apples that we'll share in a second. Those are 15, 20, 25-year breeding programs with potentially 50 people involved. Then there's post-harvest support, pest and pathogen management, and sometimes support and market. So, if we apply the rules to both, we run the risk of actually creating some challenges. So, Roger, can get that apple out somehow. So, what you're seeing here is intellectual property in the flesh. These are not commercial. So,

[00:04:42] I know whenever I've come to select committee before, people have sort of said, what's the next generation? I think, Fumzie, you've asked that a few times. This is the next generation. These are red-fleshed apples. These are not commercial. We've purposefully taken the seeds out because, IP. It's not that we don't trust you. But intellectual property needs to be protected. So, these are two different types. They're in train. You might have seen we launched alongside a partner last year, FizzApple, which is also red-fleshed apple. So, for us, we've developed a DNA marker that allows sort of baby seedlings to be tested early, which means, in our case, 100% of those trees planted in our red-fleshed breeding programs are red-fleshed types because it's not always the way. So, even if you planted the seed, there's no guarantee you'd

[00:05:29] actually get that apple. So, for us, if you look at the history, you know, 1998, we did the first generation of crosses for a red-fleshed apple, second generation in 2004, third generation in 2011, and then last year, launched Fizz alongside a partner. These are the next ones that are coming through. Why red-fleshed? High anthocyanins, so antioxidants, also good novelty, and hopefully, as you're tasting as they go around, they taste good, which is quite important for food that you eat. So, last year was the first planting. So, about 10 tonnes were produced last year of the Fizz. About 54 tonnes expected this year from Hawkes Bay and Nelson. So, this is intellectual property coming to life, but with a lot of people involved. So, behind

[00:06:16] this is genetics, plant variety rights, trademarks, global licensing agreements. So, in our case, it's, you know, for a lot of things, it's not one invention, it's a layered system of IPV. It only works because we've had long-term investment, stable ownership, and flexible commercial models. So, we see this right across what we do. So, plant varieties, as we've touched on, a small number of cultivars can generate large returns for New Zealand over decades. And then we have startups like CentiumBio, that's just had a good capital raise recently. With 15 years of research turned into a venture-backed company, the founder went along with that. It's actually still housed in our Mount Albert facility. So, we're closely connected into it, and we still sit on the cap table for it. We've got other ones like Callocurb, which is using hops extracts to help with diet sort of suppression, to

[00:07:05] help with weight loss, to compete with things like OZEMPIC, but more naturally. So, in that case, we have patents, trademarks, clinical science, and research for equity that we all connect into that. So, I guess one of the things we're really proud of is that we're already driving towards that balance that's being talked about. So, the ability, in some cases, for the scientists to actually go out and commercialise their IP, and in the other cases, where there's a big group of people for that IP to be commercialised, and that royalty revenue to come back in and actually fund future science. So, that's a big part of what we do. So, for us, I guess it's really maintaining that flexibility, that ability to be part of that. So, probably three sort of key messages. We do have a system that works pretty well today.

[00:07:52] And I think with the merger of the BSI, the ability for us to take the learnings from one into the four that have come together is really quite strong. There's clear value. There's billions of dollars. You might have seen recently, NV Apple was now a billion dollar global Apple variety, developed out of a CRI. And the second one is the strength of that system is its flexibility. So, trying to not have one size fits all and constrain things. And thirdly for us, opportunity is to sort of just make sure we strengthen that balance with the right settings. So, ultimately, we create more companies, more impact and more investment over time. So, in our case, intellectual property isn't just something we manage. It's something that builds New Zealand's future. And in our case, also, pretty good apples. So, thank you and

[00:08:39] happy to take any questions. Thank you. Your intellectual property does test really well. That's always important when it's food. And first question from Dr David Wilson. You've said all the right things for me. I've got Mark and Paul, we're a science person trying to bring those two things together. That's fantastic. I just interested in a couple of the mechanisms here because in terms of product development and business development, that sort of thing. IP in one hand is actually protecting something. Correct. And on the other hand, we also talked about research in exchange for equity. And I'm interested in the mechanism for that and how that's working. And also, if we're protecting IP, how do we

[00:09:24] actually encourage tech fusion across our system in New Zealand still protect it? Yes, there's probably two parts to that. Maybe if I touch on the research for equity, but Richard, if you want to talk about how we still allow sharing of knowledge without losing the IP, if there's anything to add. So, maybe a good example of research for equity. I don't think I'll be sharing anything that's too confidential. So, CallaCurb is a great example. CallaCurb was designed out of the science system. It was taking a Marisate, which is a bit of extract from hops and finding that they did have appetites of recent properties. It goes in a capsule. It's not something you can eat. It's got a pretty, it's a bit of extract. Very. And so, we said we wouldn't be the right people to take that to market. We put that out and someone picked that up.

[00:10:12] That then became the company that is CallaCurb. We had a small royalty arrangement as part of that and they said, actually, we really value the work you can do in clinical science linked to this. We've got some funding. So, we can pay for some of the work, but actually, would you be interested in doing research for equity at the same time? So, we said, great, we'll take some of the cash back in, but then we'll also co-invest with some of our own people and do the clinical research. We've actually got someone who speaks at international conferences alongside their chief executive still today and we own, I think it's technically 4.9% or thereabouts of that company, which is the research for equity. So, it's kind of almost passive. Yeah, correct. Yeah. So, we're not, we're on the cap table because we believe in

[00:10:57] the product and we believe it's something that can come back. So, we look at all those on a case-by-case basis and we've got another one which I can't share the details of, but we've been approached from someone that we didn't start the IP. They've started something. They've gone, actually, we think you could really help us supercharge this. Would you be interested in doing more and take a research for equity position which we're exploring today? Richard, do you want to talk about how we protect IP and still connected? Sure. So, you know, obviously our research is and we want to disseminate information where that's appropriate as widely as possible. For a number of reasons. The name one is for the individual reputation of the researchers but also the organisation as a whole. So, we attract more business and collaborations in. So, we have to balance that when knowledge is briefly shared, like through publications or any other kind of

[00:11:42] mechanism. So, we have a process where both the science leadership and also commercial make those decisions about which pieces of information are best shared widely, which others are more appropriate for protection of IP. So, that's a constant process. Supplementary. You know, New Zealand has got a bit of a problem hasn't it in terms of keeping and owning our specialisations and intellectual property because we grow these firms and they leave or they get bought. And as a result, I think over the last 20, 30, even 50 years, we had a bit of a hollowing out. So, if we're looking at our whole scale of businesses, the medium-sized ones, it's like hollowed out. We got lots of smalls, we got a few bigs and not as many mediums and

[00:12:29] I'm really interested into this and the stickiness of those medium-sized enterprises for the New Zealand economy. So, we own them and we turn them into large businesses. Yeah, look, one probably good thing I'd say is there's been a group of us that have been connecting for, I don't know, five or six months now, trying to exactly discuss this challenge. How do we get not just start-up investment in, but that investment that gets you through the valley of death and get something started. Obviously, you know, New Zealand, we do exceptionally well on the global stage, but we're small. I mean, our consumer base is small, right? And so the opportunity to actually grow companies is quite often international, but obviously we'd like them to still be based in New Zealand

[00:13:14] or directed out of New Zealand. So, how we do that, how we bring investment into New Zealand and actually recognise that New Zealand is the right place to continue to grow these things is definitely a challenge. I don't know, I think we've got the answer, but it is something we're trying to work alongside the system to say how do we do this. Things like apples and kiwi fruit and some of those areas are quite different because we do have a natural advantage. We grow exceptionally good climate reproduction in New Zealand, and so the IP for those does both stay here and move around the world. So, NV, you might know the number, but I think it's 60% of NV or more planting is international, 40% locally, but IP is still held locally. It's controlled. Okay, next question. Thank you. Thanks for being with us. I have a question about our international arrangements,

[00:14:01] particularly the UK and European trade deals, which include four New Zealand, some obligations around our food system and the IP within it and regional indicators. How are we progressing those obligations domestically for our exporters? What's your role in working with exporters to understand those things? Our IP on the world stage for some of those plants that we hold dear to ourselves like Manuka, what's your role in making sure that we uphold our international obligations, but also get the best deal for Kiwis? Yeah, great question. I can maybe lean into some of that. So, one of the good things about things like plant varieties rights is that there's a generally a global approach to those. So, they're filed in multiple countries,

[00:14:46] which helps and, you know, like effectively a patent for plants at the risk of really oversimplifying it. So, the ability to protect those you've seen in China, for example, where things have been pulled back out as a result of illegal plantings. If you look at the, might be a sensitive topic at the moment, but the India Free Trade Agreement, which we're in favour of, that also sort of talks around the opportunities for us to help improve Kiwifruit quality in India. That's not about us necessarily planting our varieties there. If Zespri want to do that over time, we'd support them, but that's a market facing decision. From a science perspective, we think we can help move people out of poverty by helping with quality, with pest and pathogen management, with productivity. So, those are

[00:15:31] the kinds of things that we work quite strongly in. I used to be in the dairy industry and it was the same with the support we gave to some of the Southeast Asian countries on dairy. So, it wasn't around how do we remove the need for New Zealand dairy. It was how do we help support local production at the same time, while recognising the role of New Zealand in there. So, New Zealand's got a pretty good reputation globally on working with others, and EMPAT in particular, if I can call them out, they're an exceptionally good job of connecting in in a non- competitive way. And we've had a lot of experience working overseas with people, but we haven't run into any, at least from a science perspective, any challenges on meeting any of those obligations. And we always sort of partner alongside the New Zealand companies to make sure we're not in conflict. We wouldn't go chasing revenue that isn't aligned with the

[00:16:18] best interests of New Zealand. Ruben Dootson. Thank you, and thank you for the apples. We always like red things. Change the colour. Yeah. Blue one. Blue one. And can it be noted that the majority here did? But coming back to you talked in the beginning about flexibility, and flexibility is sometimes easier when you have certainty around the parameters. So there was a review into copyright, updating our copyright legislation that's stalled somewhat, but what would be what are the top priorities for you that we should be looking at in that space? Yeah, we don't do a lot of

[00:17:03] copyright per se in our space. We'd probably do more in trademark connections. So to give you an example, Envy as an Apple has a plant variety right that at some stage will expire, but the brand won't. And so actually having that protection of the brand when people go, oh, this is an Envy Apple. It's grown a certain way. It tastes a certain way. I know the quality of it because it's what I've been bought and someone else has to go, hey, here's our Apple that's really similar to Envy. It's a copy, but it's not. And I've got to call it Ruben's Apples or whatever it is. It doesn't have that same cut through. And so that's one of the things we've been working alongside a lot of our customers and partners on is how we support that whole end to end value chain of the brand as well as the product. So that's

[00:17:49] everything. We're quite fortunate as an organization where we're one of the few in the world certainly of our scale that goes from kind of pre-farm gate right through to in market. So we support growing offshore. We do a lot of work on quality, on productivity, on work through supply chain, on pest and pathogen management including in some different countries as things are growing around the world. And that's all about that brand reputation. Yeah. So I can add to that just one more point. I think also important to us with across all these types of intellectual property, trademarks, copyright, PVRs, patients is syncing up with international legislation. Where it really gets sticky for us because we export so much actually having those you know, patent laws or PVR laws and sync with each

[00:18:35] other is very, very important because we have to we have to not only deal with the laws that are here but make sure that that our products actually comply and with the laws in the markets we're selling to because that's the way that intellectual property works. So that's really, really important. So the more that you know this group can help synchronize those intellectual property laws the better. And when we fall behind or out of sync as we were with the PVR legislation we were behind getting it back on in line. And it's really important for us in our products. Yeah. Okay. Go to Dr. Vanessa Venig. Thank you very much. So previously when we've had you for review briefings and other things we've discussed the role of AI and science. Do you see any challenges

[00:19:21] in terms of intellectual property within the work streams that you have around intellectual property? We should. Because hello. Hello. I know, yeah. That's why I threw it at you. More apples. We were fortunate enough to be shortlisted on the recent artificial intelligence hunt for a provider for an AI platform to New Zealand. So we're very proud around that. I think AI is always going to be a double-edged sword and it's going to supercharge a lot of our research. It's going to give us insights, obviously, with all the data being able to be fed into that that we'd never had before. But at the same time, it does cause issues,

[00:20:08] especially if we're sharing data locally, internationally. There's the leakage of, you know, potential for leakage of information that might not be appropriate of personal, commercial, whatever. So absolutely. I think we're all slowly kind of moving through this with our eyes fully open in terms of what the opportunities are as well as what the pitfalls might be. Yeah, and I think the opportunity for it to speed up things is probably real. The one that maybe you didn't specifically ask, but the one we're probably keeping more of an eye on is gene technology around the world. So that's the one that we really do risk in New Zealand falling behind on. Yeah. Thank you. A pretty quick final form. I don't know, he leaps a very quick pause. Oh, right. We... Bring us home. So fast. Look, it's a question about,

[00:20:54] I would like us to say something sensible when we report on to the House on this topic of food systems thinking not about your export markets but in the domestic market here in New Zealand. The role of intellectual property in our food system. What is your restriction on whether it's resulting in New Zealanders having fresh, healthy kai that they can afford? Yeah, we can probably only answer from a science perspective. So from our perspective, we want to see people having fresh, healthy food. And I think that's one of the things that New Zealand does exceptionally well. Whether it's affordable or not, that I guess the role we play in that is how do we increase productivity? How do we reduce loss? How do we get more out of a hectare of land that doesn't create more damage to the land as part of that? So that's really where we focus

[00:21:40] but we don't do the pricing. We don't do any of that. We spend a lot of time really in that background of how do we make it more affordable? How do we use less chemicals? How do we protect from pest and pathogens? How much are we doing? Yeah. So we will... Huge. That's a big part of our work. Yeah. We can decide if we want to send some written questions later on. So we are running out of time. I was really tempted to say that why this app is not read all through but after we've been squished in one moment. There's a good reason for that. I was hoping someone would ask because if they read all the way through they don't quite taste the same. So the infosign is well good for you. You can also create some other things. So that's a good balance. Just has to be mature. Great. Thank you so much to all of you for your time. And for answering these questions. Thank you. Thank you. Always enjoy this.
