[00:00:00] Good morning. How are you there, Nick? How are you there, Nick? Having a lot of sounds, isn't it? Yeah. Nick, are you there? Can you turn the camera on? That's the instruction. Oh, good. How are we going? Good morning. Getting there. Yep. No, can you hear me okay now? Yep, we can. We've got 10 minutes for you. Okay. Thank you very much. Good morning, and thank you for this opportunity to speak. I'm Nick Smale, and I'm making the submission on behalf of the West Auckland Licensing Trust Action

[00:00:46] Group, or WALTAG, as we're sometimes called. We are advocates for competition. We are a group of community members. We have a wide range of political perspectives. We're united in the view that the licensing trust monopoly in West Auckland does more harm than good. We have previously attempted a petition, which unfortunately fell agonizingly short with the required number of signatures, and some of us have also participated in recent licensing trust elections under a WALTAG banner. I understand our submission has been read, and so I'll only speak briefly, and I would welcome questions and comments from the committee. All right, very good. Are you there? Are you finished? No, no, still going. Oh, sorry. Yep, but I will be brief. So our submission poses a simple question.

[00:01:33] Licensing trusts expected to be neutral in their own democracy. And we've provided some examples in the written submission, which I won't repeat today, and the purpose in providing those is not to accuse the West Auckland Trust or anyone of wrongdoing. And actually the crux of our submission is that their actions are probably lawful. And the question we're posing is whether that's right and whether that's what Parliament intended. And that really comes off, this submission really comes off the back of two things. And the first was correspondence with the Office of the Order to General. I wrote to them about the trust using public money for market research and PR advice, which had a specific objective to identify key arguments to combat the WALTAG campaign. And that was alongside an apparent allocation of a fighting fund to meet the challenge from WALTAG

[00:02:19] hit on. Now the Order to General took a look at those and said that, A, they don't enforce the electoral act, the local electoral act, and B, any restricting of trust spending would be a policy matter and not one for their office. So basically the message back from the Order to General was that there was nothing to see there. And the second was a recent Ombudsman investigation, which ended up examining whether there was public interest in disclosing pro-monopoly advocacy by the trusts. And that came down to whether they thought that that advocacy was in any way improper. And in the end, after a convoluted discussion, the Ombudsman took the view that even if their activity had electoral consequences, that it was not improper so long as their motive was to benefit their commercial position.

[00:03:07] So it didn't matter that the mechanism was to influence voters, so long as the motive was a commercial work. And so that's what brings me to today's submission. I see things which strike me as inappropriate for a democratically controlled public body. But when I've raised these with the relevant authorities, they say they're okay. And in fact, in many cases, the public won't even get to see what they're up to. And so thus I come back to that question. Did parliament intend that licensing trusts would be some kind of special kind of democracy where the trust itself needn't stay neutral, but instead can campaign in support of continuing their monopoly? It's not what I choose, but I don't get set the rules. And I'm very interested to hear what you think or to get some questions. So thank you. Right, I've got Mr Todd Stevenson. Thanks, Nick. And thanks

[00:03:52] for your submission actually bringing this issue to our attention, the committee's attention, because I think it does actually kind of highlight a bit of an unusual situation, right? Where, again, you're probably pretty clear on ACT's views on licensing trust monopolies, but putting that aside, even if you say that these trusts are doing a good thing, that they're obviously running a commercial, well, yeah, running an alcohol business basically in their area. But then you've got the requirement for them to obviously then get elected members. And so it does seem slightly odd that they, yeah, they can then obviously use funds from that commercial operation to do some of the things that you've highlighted here. Just around the kind of research they were doing into interviews and attitudes, can you just talk

[00:04:42] a bit more about that and what that kind of showed? Yeah, so I mean, they used those funds. Yeah. So they've done, they generally do annual research. And once, shortly after we formed in 2018, I think they put in some questions around the arguments that we were making and asked had people signed our petition, they asked, they took some statements from our website verbatim and tested whether people agreed with those or not, and tested arguments in response to those to say, you know, which ones resonated with the public to inform them, inform their communications activities. So that we found out about that in 2021 through,

[00:05:32] or 2022, I think, around about then anyway, through an eventual Lagoima release. And there was a little bit of publicity around that. And they've actually toned that down a bit in recent years. And I think the questions they're asking now are a little bit less on the nose. But even just recently, I think we've seen in their research that they've just they've just let a little bit of of it out. They're still asking the public whether they've heard of the West Auckland Licensing Trust Action Group and their research. And, you know, it's a strange question for a local authority to be asking about one specific ticket. But that's an interesting comment you just made there. And you said the local authority, are they a local authority? They're not a TLA as such.

[00:06:18] They are under most legislation they are. So under the local electorate, they are local authority's members. Interest Act, they are Lagoima, they are, but they're not under the local Government Act. So they're not covered by the local Government Act. And tell me, there's others around the country, like Southland, I think, are they or just in Bacargal, sorry, in Bacargal, do they have their own bespoke legislation or are they? No, so they're all governed by the sale and supply of alcohol act. There are four left with their monopoly rights. So in Bacargal and Matura, down south, and Portage and Waitakere out west. All of the ones, there's, I think, maybe another 12 or so that don't have monopoly rights. They're still all governed by that same sale and supply of alcohol legislation.

[00:07:03] Yeah, we're obviously contemplated, but I suspect outside the jurisdiction of the bill we're considering. But what's an inquiry? So not, but because how it works and what framework it's operating is a pretty important thing, I think. But anyway, any other questions, members? No, fascinating conversation. No, just make one comment there, Andrew, on your comment about the scope. So, you know, I think when we see, when we look at councils, a lot of that sort of neutrality stuff is bundled up in the proper purpose and around the purpose of local government. So if it was to be addressed through that way, then it would go to sale and supply of alcohol, but it could equally be addressed in the local electoral act.

[00:07:48] So again, do they have their own bespoke legislation or how have they, what's the framework that sits out? Yeah. So in the sale and supply of alcohol act, sections about 300 to about 380 or so have all the information about licensing and community trusts and that sort of is the fundamental. All right. Hey, thank you for your submission this morning and joining us. Been very interesting discussion. Thank you very much, Andrew. Cool. Right. Now, we've got local government officials. Good morning. I see a couple of you there, Swann. Right, we've got

[00:08:35] 10 minutes with you. Thank you. Looking forward to hearing from you. And I'm a Hinoe Ke koutou katoa. Just checking you can hear me. Yes, we can. Thank you for your time this morning. I'm Manik Davidson, Chief Executive at Horo whenua District Council, but here in my capacity as Vice President for Tatora, which is the local government professionals network for Aotearoa, New Zealand. Firstly, apologies from Joe Miller, our president. She's tied up in a council meeting this morning. So you have me instead.

[00:09:21] But I am joined here this morning by Dean Hefford, who's Group Manager, Infrastructure and Services for Mulbrough District Council, but he chairs the Tatora Electrical Reference Group. And we're also joined by Michael Morris, Manager Governance and Legal at Invercargill City Council, and no doubt was listening with interest to that most recent conversation. And he is Deputy Chair of the Tatora Electrical Reference Group. And I'm sure many of you know the infamous Raymond Hurran, who is our Chief Advisor here at Tatora. Look, I'll just make some very brief comments, but then leave time for you to hopefully ask the teams some questions. Our central submission as Tatora is that the New

[00:10:06] Zealand's local electoral system cannot continue in its current trajectory. Declining postal volumes mean that reliance on postal voting is becoming increasingly costly, operationally fragile and logistically complex. In addition, recent experiences demonstrated that the security and integrity of postal voting can be compromised. And we know that that in turn affects public confidence in the electoral process. At the same time, we consider that online voting is not a viable option in the foreseeable future. Persistent security risk and unresolved public trust means that it cannot yet meet the standards

[00:10:52] for democratic elections. And while we absolutely think that those conditions need to be regularly reassessed, we consider that right now electoral reform should focus its energy and attention elsewhere. But the solution is not just as simple as moving from a postal vote to an in-person vote and leaving the rest of the system unchanged. An in-person vote is a fundamentally different voter experience. And our submission as Tatora is that the whole system needs to be considered. Transitioning to it would require careful consideration around representation arrangements, electoral system design, the provision of candidate information, and even seemingly

[00:11:40] technical matters such as the order of candidate names on the ballot paper. And at a time when local government is going through so much government reform, I think what we need to be mindful of is how the community understand the electoral process when they're not quite clear what their representation arrangements might look like under a simplified local government framework. So for this reason, it's our submission that electoral reform must include a redesign of the institutional arrangements that deliver local elections. We absolutely support the centralisation of local elections functions. We think a move to in-person voting strengthens this case and supports a nationally coordinated approach to things like workforce development,

[00:12:28] voter education, and election delivery standards. And just very briefly, part two of our submission therefore advocates for a whole-of-system approach to local electoral reform. New Zealand must consider not only how people vote but why they vote or why they choose not to vote and what structural procedural and social barriers prevent participation. And so in concluding, I want to note that our strength as Taitoata lies in the collective place-based experience that we have as local government practitioners who have delivered elections in real communities under real conditions for many, many election cycles. And it's in that spirit, I encourage the

[00:13:19] committee to think about how Taitoata can assist in offering assistance as you continue to explore what the future might look like. We are happy to answer questions. Well, thank you. 29 recommendations, a fair number of them. We've got Mr Roseborn, who might have got a question for you. Thank you, Chair. You suggest a six-yearly review of online voting suitability. I'm just wondering why you landed on six years and also who should lead that review and how it's forenees what should be made public. I'll defer to Raymond to speak to the detail on this one. Well, technology's moving quickly, Mr Roseborn. I think six years is kind of a bit of a halfway

[00:14:13] house. It takes account of the electoral cycle being three. It kind of allows for some period of time for technology to develop while not leaving so much time that well, not keeping in the review rolling reasonably frequently. As to who, I think that needs to be something that's done by DIA, among other things. They are working on systems for identity management at the moment. The security agencies, GCSB and ZSIS, the local government sector and the

[00:14:59] Ministry of Justice is keepers of the central government electoral system. And the reason I say that is if you're looking there at some point someone is going to ask why we're not also looking at its suitability for parliamentary elections. Are there any other players we think should be involved? Mr Chairman, just the recommendation from the GCSB was that they needed a long lead in time to do the security reviews and investigations. So they didn't want us to have too short a timeframe between reviews. So that was part of the reasoning for the six yearly role as well. All right. Thank you for explaining that. I've got a question from Hon Dr Duncan Webb. Thank you, Mr Chair. My question is a more broad question.

[00:15:49] There does seem to be a degree of dissatisfaction with local government and elected representatives. And I guess I'm interested in whether you track essentially trust or confidence in local government and whether the lack of enthusiasm for voting and a lack of trust in how the voting system works has any bearing on that. Thank you for the question. I'd encourage the committee to dig deep at a place-based level, to think about in your community

[00:16:37] the things that you touch and feel and see every day that is adding value through the incredible work that local government does. I think we all accept that there is a challenge around trusting confidence of government and that that is about local and central government because that's about the services and the experience all New Zealanders have. And I don't know if our communities necessarily make a distinction every day between what local government delivers and what central government delivers. I know that every council is required to be tracking satisfaction, voice of our rate payer and certainly I know with it from a Haurafenoa District Council perspective we absolutely

[00:17:27] track trust and confidence and the net promoter score is often a methodology used across councils and I'm not sure if you've heard already from local government New Zealand but I suspect when you do hear from local government New Zealand one of the things they could talk about is the reputational survey work that was done a few years ago that tells a story about the need for community to better understand what local government does and I'm sure you will all agree that that part of the solution to that is about central and local government working together to figure out how we can continue to deliver efficient and effective services to our community at place through partnership. All right and now I've got another question from Celia Wade Brown.

[00:18:16] Completely different area. I'm interested in the having that central administration to the local elections and how you see the cost sharing between central government and local government if the Electoral Commission were to actually run the elections. I'll be you make a point in your submission that there's quite a variation between I think it's your submission might be the background paper there's quite a variation in how much different councils spend per capita and so how would you make a sort of a fair play there? Yeah I think that it's a really good practical example of how

[00:19:01] the financial constraints that councils are operating in where we need to consider what unintended consequences of like a ratescaping regime might look like because it could actually limit councils ability to invest in funding this stuff well. I think the opportunity if there is a centralised system is for it to ensure that the small councils are not bearing the cost in the same way that larger councils would be and surely there are some efficiencies through a centralised system from both central and local government electoral systems and so I don't think we're suggesting local government shouldn't pay their share but I think that there would need to be some

[00:19:50] sound methodology to ensure small communities were not disadvantaged. If I look at that not just we'd also expect to have some representation around the commission to input into the design of of the invite promotion to input into the charging methodologies and so on. I just also add that one other I accept the point the member makes one of the key benefits of centralising things is that that there would be a degree of consistency and approach across local authorities as to for example what promotion is done and so on. All right hey thank you for your submission we have heard from

[00:20:36] local government so that question before but thank you very helpful discussion this morning for your time. Thank you. Right we're going to go back into privacy.
